

--- START OF Clever framework.pdf ---

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025, pages 7940–7951
July 27 - August 1, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics
CLeVeR: Multi-modal Contrastive Learning for Vulnerability Code
Representation
Jiayuan Li1,2, Lei Cui3*, Sen Zhao1, Yun Yang1, Lun Li1, Hongsong Zhu1
1Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{lijiayuan, zhaosen, yangyun, lilun, zhuhongsong}@iie.ac.cn,
cuilei@zgclab.edu.cn
Abstract
Automated vulnerability detection has become
increasingly important. Many existing meth-
ods utilize deep learning models to obtain
code representations for vulnerability detec-
tion.
However, these approaches predomi-
nantly capture the overall semantics of the code
rather than its intrinsic vulnerability-specific
semantics. To address this issue, we propose
CLeVeR, the first approach that leverages con-
trastive learning to generate precise vulnera-
bility code representations under the supervi-
sion of vulnerability descriptions. Specifically,
we introduce an Adapter, a Representation Re-
finement module, and a Description Simula-
tor to mitigate the challenges of semantic mis-
alignment and imbalance between code and
descriptions, and input data inconsistency be-
tween pre-training and fine-tuning stages, re-
spectively. For vulnerability detection and clas-
sification tasks, CLeVeR achieves F1 scores of
72.82% (real-world dataset) and 80.34%, out-
performing state-of-the-art methods (SOTAs)
by 11.85% and 13.61%. Additionally, CLeVeR
also outperforms SOTAs in zero-shot inference,
demonstrating the transferability of its gener-
ated vulnerability code representations.
1
Introduction
In recent years, with the development of deep learn-
ing (DL), DL-based code vulnerability detection
has gained significant attention. Many approaches
have been proposed to utilize various deep neural
networks such as LSTM and BERT (Devlin et al.,
2019) to learn code representations from source
code (Rahman et al., 2024) and related code struc-
tures (code gadget (Li et al., 2018), SeVCs (Li et al.,
2022), CPG (Chakraborty et al., 2022), PDG (Wu
et al., 2022)) for vulnerability detection.
Despite the promising improvement, existing
methods still suffer low precision and low recall
in real-world scenarios. This is primarily because
*Corresponding author.
(b) Challenges of contrastive learning with in CLeVeR 
CLeVeR pre-training
CLeVeR fine-tuning
semantic
misalignment
input data
inconsistency
semantic
imbalance
...
len(   )  >>  len(   )
...
4 data = ' ';
5 fscanf (stdin, "%c", &data);
     ...
26 char result = data + 1;
27 print(result);
"adds 1 to data without 
bounds checking"
Text
Encoder
Code
Encoder
(a) Comparison of existing methods and CLeVeR
Our method
Code
Overall
representation
CodePTM
CLeVeR
...
Vulnerability
representation
CLS
Existing methods
CLS
Figure 1: The Motivation of CLeVeR.
they typically learn overall code representations
that capture broad functional semantics (e.g., "this
code performs file parsing"), inevitably introduc-
ing noises irrelevant to vulnerability patterns, as
shown in Figure 1(a). In contrast, we argue that ac-
curately capturing vulnerability-related semantics
is essential for effective detection. We observe that
vulnerability descriptions contain rich vulnerability
characteristics – such as "without bounds check-
ing" – which inherently define the discriminative
features we seek to capture. Thus, we propose to
leverage semantic alignment techniques to utilize
vulnerability description for enhancing the genera-
tion of vulnerability-specific code representations.
Leveraging generative models is one feasible ap-
proach, as it reconstructs descriptions from code.
However, its reconstruction objectives tend to pri-
oritize linguistic fluency over the detection of vul-
nerabilities. As a result, the model tends to focus
on superficial code properties that correlate with
textual patterns, rather than on the underlying vul-
nerability patterns. Contrastive learning, under the
CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) framework, mitigates
this issue by directly optimizing the semantic align-
ment between code and text in a shared latent space.
7940
By maximizing the mutual information of matched
vulnerability pairs, the model learns more discrim-
inative vulnerability features, avoiding the noise
introduced by syntactic reconstruction.
In this paper, we propose a Contrastive Learning
for Vulnerability Code Representation (CLeVeR)
framework that leverages contrastive learning to ac-
quire vulnerability code representations. Through
CLIP’s distinctive dual-encoder architecture and
contrastive loss, CLeVeR establishes fine-grained
semantic alignment between code and vulnerabil-
ity descriptions. Hence, representations generated
by CLeVeR are capable of capturing more precise
code semantics that better characterize vulnerabil-
ity patterns, which can be effectively applied in
vulnerability-related downstream tasks. Although
idea is simple, the direct application of CLIP faces
three main challenges, as shown in Figure 1(b).
The first challenge is the semantic misalignment
between different modalities, which is mainly be-
cause the variables in code and the words in descrip-
tions are typically not in the same feature space.
The second challenge arises from the semantic im-
balance between different modalities. Since the
full source code is much longer than the vulnera-
bility descriptions, the semantics embedded in the
code far exceed those in the descriptions, which
further complicates semantic alignment. The third
challenge is the input data inconsistency between
pre-training and fine-tuning stages, as only source
code is available during fine-tuning and testing.
CLeVeR introduces three novel components to
systematically address these challenges. First, it
proposes Adapter to project code and description
representations to the same common space to im-
prove alignment. Second, it introduces a Represen-
tation Refinement module that pre-refines code se-
mantics to match the level of description semantics,
enabling improved alignment. Third, it introduces
the Description Simulator, which learns to gener-
ate refined code representations during pre-training,
enabling the code representations to self-refine
without descriptions. This allows CLeVeR to simu-
late descriptions and obtain accurate vulnerability
code representations during fine-tuning. Further-
more, for evaluation, we prepared a well-annotated
dataset named Vulnerability Contrastive Learning
Data (VCLData)1, which includes 280,034 vulnera-
ble and secure functions along with corresponding
1Currently, no public dataset exists that aligns vulnerability
code with natural language descriptions.
descriptions, sourced from SARD (SARD).
We conduct experiments on several datasets and
vulnerability-related downstream tasks. On semi-
synthetic and real-world datasets for the vulnerabil-
ity detection task, CLeVeR achieves F1 scores of
98.03% and 72.82%, respectively, outperforming
SOTAs by 5.70% and 11.85%. For the classifica-
tion task, CLeVeR attains a weighted-F1 score of
80.34%, surpassing SOTAs by 13.61%. Further-
more, CLeVeR demonstrates superior performance
in zero-shot scenarios compared to previous meth-
ods. We employ visualization techniques to show-
case the representations generated by CLeVeR,
proving it indeed captures precise vulnerability se-
mantics. We summarize contributions as follows:
• We propose CLeVeR, the first approach that
leverages contrastive learning to generate pre-
cise vulnerability code representations under
the supervision of vulnerability descriptions.
• We design the Adapter, the Representation Re-
finement module, and the Description Simula-
tor to address the challenges faced in aligning
semantics of code and descriptions.
• Experiments demonstrate that CLeVeR outper-
forms SOTA methods in vulnerability detec-
tion and classification. Our code is available
at https://github.com/yoimiya-nlp/CLeVeR.
2
Related work
2.1
DL-based Vulnerability Detection
Early DL-based vulnerability detection methods
(Li et al., 2018; Russell et al., 2018) utilize simple
models like LSTM and CNN to capture code rep-
resentations for detection. However, the detection
performance of these text-based methods remains
sub-optimal as they overlook the logical structure
in source code. To overcome this challenge, many
studies (Dam et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2019; Wu
et al., 2021, 2022; Wen et al., 2023) leverage pro-
gram analysis techniques to derive both syntactic
and semantic information from source code. They
represent the source code with various code struc-
tures like abstract syntax trees and code property
graphs (CPG), and then feed them into DL models
for detection. Nevertheless, these methods focus
primarily on learning overall code representations
rather than specific vulnerability representations.
Recently, with the emergence of CodeBERT
(Feng et al., 2020), GraphCodeBERT (Guo et al.,
2021) and UniXcoder (Guo et al., 2022), methods
7941
Representation Exraction
Code Representation
Description Representation
 void add_one()
 {
     char data;
     data = ' ';
     fscanf (stdin, "%c", &data);
     ...
     {
         char result = data + 1;
         printHexCharLine(result);
     }
 }
Read data from the console
using fscanf().
Add 1 to data.
Vulnerable Code
Source Description
Sink Description
Reason Description
This code first reads data from
the console using fscanf(), then
adds 1 to data without proper
bounds checking, which may
cause an overflow.
So
Si
Re
...
Source code
+
CPG=AST+CFG+DFG
CodePTM
RoBERTa
Adapter
Adapter
cls token
Representation Refinement 
Multi-head
Cross Attention
K, V
Q
Refined Code
Representation
+
x λ1
x (1-λ1)
Vulnerability
Code
Representation
Predict
Copy
Contrastive Learning
C1 C2 C3
...
Cn
D1
D2
D3
...
Dn
...
...
InfoNCE Loss
+
x λ1
Downstream Fine-tuning
Vulnerability
Detection
Vulnerability
Classification
0/1
CWEXXX
Pre-training stage
Fine-tuning stage
+
x λ0
x λ0
x (1-2λ0)
x (1-λ1)
flatten
Linear Probe
nodes
C
D
...
Description
Simulator
Simulate
Figure 2: The overview of CLeVeR. It consists of four modules: 1) Representation Extraction module extracts both
code and description representations and adapts them to the same feature space. 2) Representation Refinement
module utilizes a cross-attention mechanism to generate the vulnerability code representation. 3) Contrastive
Learning module compares the code and description representations to align semantics. 4) Downstream Fine-tuning
module executes tasks with linear probe.
like SVulD (Ni et al., 2023) and CasualVul (Rah-
man et al., 2024) apply code pre-training models
into vulnerability detection. However, the key chal-
lenge of extracting vulnerability-specific semantics
remains unable to be addressed. In addition to de-
tection, a few methods (Zou et al., 2019; Akshar
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025) explore classification,
but they also suffer from the inability to capture
vulnerability snippet representations accurately.
2.2
Contrastive Learning
Contrastive learning, as proposed in (Hadsell et al.,
2006), emerges as a powerful framework in self-
supervised learning, intending to learn meaning-
ful and discriminative representations by contrast-
ing positive and negative sample pairs. Recently,
contrastive learning methods are widely applied in
the domain of image and text representation learn-
ing (He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Giorgi et al.,
2021; Wang et al., 2023b), and then extended to
code (Cheng et al., 2022; Zamani et al., 2023). In
addition, many cross-modal contrastive learning
methods are proposed. For example, CLIP (Rad-
ford et al., 2021) leverages natural language su-
pervision to learn transferable visual features, then
CLAP (Wang et al., 2024) applies it to assembly
code. However, vulnerability descriptions often
contain less information compared to source code,
posing a challenge for precise semantic alignment.
3
Methodology
The overview of CLeVeR is shown in Figure 2. In
pre-training stage, we first generate the code and
description representations and project them to the
same feature space. Then, we refine the code repre-
sentation through a cross-attention mechanism and
obtain the vulnerability code representation. Con-
sequently, we optimize the parameters of CLeVeR
by comparing the vulnerability code representa-
tion with the corresponding description represen-
tation through contrastive learning, thereby obtain-
ing a more accurate representation. In fine-tuning
stage, we fine-tune the pre-trained CLeVeR model
to achieve vulnerability detection and classification.
Since no vulnerability descriptions are available to
refine the code representation during fine-tuning
and testing stages, we propose a description simula-
tor, additionally training a feed-forward network to
ensure accurate vulnerability code representation
without the supervision of description.
3.1
Representation Extraction
3.1.1
Pre-trained Model
Considering raw code lacks logical information,
we use CPG to augment the representation. First,
we utilize the previous pre-trained models to ex-
tract representations of both code and descriptions.
For the code, we choose CodeBERT (Feng et al.,
7942


--- END OF Clever framework.pdf ---



--- START OF 1. A framework for using DL to detec t software vulnerabilities..pdf ---

1
SySeVR: A Framework for Using Deep Learning to
Detect Software Vulnerabilities
Zhen Li, Deqing Zou, Shouhuai Xu, Hai Jin, Senior member, IEEE,
Yawei Zhu, Zhaoxuan Chen, Sujuan Wang, and Jialai Wang
Abstract—The detection of software vulnerabilities (or vulner-
abilities for short) is an important problem that has yet to be
tackled, as manifested by many vulnerabilities reported on a
daily basis. This calls for machine learning methods to auto-
mate vulnerability detection. Deep learning is attractive for this
purpose because it does not require human experts to manually
deﬁne features. Despite the tremendous success of deep learning
in other domains, its applicability to vulnerability detection is
not systematically understood. In order to ﬁll this void, we
propose the ﬁrst systematic framework for using deep learning
to detect vulnerabilities. The framework, dubbed Syntax-based,
Semantics-based, and Vector Representations (SySeVR), focuses
on obtaining program representations that can accommodate
syntax and semantic information pertinent to vulnerabilities. Our
experiments with 4 software products demonstrate the usefulness
of the framework: we detect 15 vulnerabilities that are not
reported in the National Vulnerability Database. Among these
15 vulnerabilities, 7 are unknown and have been reported to the
vendors, and the other 8 have been “silently” patched by the
vendors when releasing newer versions of the products.
Index Terms—Vulnerability detection, security, deep learning,
program analysis, program representation.
I. INTRODUCTION
S
OFTWARE vulnerabilities (or vulnerabilities) are a funda-
mental reason for the prevalence of cyber attacks. Despite
academic and industrial efforts at improving software quality,
vulnerabilities remain a big problem. This can be justiﬁed by
the fact that each year, many vulnerabilities are reported in
the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) [1].
Given that vulnerabilities are inevitable, it is important to
detect them as early as possible. Source code-based static
analysis is an important approach to detecting vulnerabilities,
including code similarity-based methods [2], [3] and pattern-
based methods [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. Code similarity-
based methods can detect vulnerabilities that are incurred by
code cloning, but have high false-negatives when vulnera-
bilities are not caused by code cloning [11]. Pattern-based
methods may require human experts to deﬁne vulnerability
features for representing vulnerabilities, which makes them
error-prone and laborious. Therefore, an ideal method should
be able to detect vulnerabilities caused by a wide range of
Corresponding author: Deqing Zou.
Z. Li, D. Zou, H. Jin, Y. Zhu, Z. Chen, S. Wang, and J. Wang are with the
Services Computing Technology and System Lab, Big Data Technology and
System Lab, Cluster and Grid Computing Lab, School of Computer Science
and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan
430074, China (e-mail: {lizhen hust, deqingzou, hjin, yokisir, zhaoxaunchen,
elaine, u201514789}@hust.edu.cn).
S. Xu is with the Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at
San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78249, USA (e-mail: shxu@cs.utsa.edu).
reasons while imposing as little reliance on human experts as
possible.
Deep learning — including Recurrent Neural Networks
(RNN) [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN) [17], [18], [19], and Deep Belief Networks
(DBN) [20], [21] — has been successful in image and natural
language processing. While it is tempting to use deep learning
to detect vulnerabilities, we observe that there is a “domain
gap”: deep learning is born to cope with data with natural
vector representations (e.g., pixels of images); in contrast,
software programs do not have such vector representations.
Recently, we proposed the ﬁrst deep learning-based vulnera-
bility detection system VulDeePecker [11] with the capabil-
ity of pinning down the locations of vulnerabilities. While
demonstrating the feasibility of using deep learning to detect
vulnerabilities, VulDeePecker has a range of weaknesses:
(i) It considers only the vulnerabilities that are related to
library/API function calls. (ii) It leverages only the semantic
information induced by data dependency. (iii) It considers only
the particular RNN known as Bidirectional Long Short-Term
Memory (BLSTM). (iv) It makes no effort to explain the cause
of false-positives and false-negatives.
Our contributions. In this paper, we propose the ﬁrst sys-
tematic framework for using deep learning to detect vulner-
abilities. The framework is centered at answering the fol-
lowing question: How can we represent programs as vectors
that accommodate syntax and semantic information that is
suitable for vulnerability detection? In order to answer this
question, we introduce and deﬁne the notions of Syntax-
based Vulnerability Candidates (SyVCs) and Semantics-based
Vulnerability Candidates (SeVCs), and design algorithms for
computing them. Intuitively, SyVCs reﬂect vulnerability syn-
tax characteristics, and SeVCs extend SyVCs to accommodate
the semantic information induced by data dependency and
control dependency. Correspondingly, the framework is called
Syntax-based, Semantics-based, and Vector Representations,
or SySeVR for short. As a piggyback, this study overcomes
the aforementioned weaknesses (i)-(iv) of [11].
In order to evaluate SySeVR, we produce a dataset of 126
types of vulnerabilities caused by various reasons from the
National Vulnerability Database (NVD) [22] and the Software
Assurance Reference Dataset (SARD) [23], while noting that
the dataset published by [11] is not sufﬁcient for our purpose
because it contains only 2 types of vulnerabilities. Our dataset
is of independent value, and has been made publicly available
at https://github.com/SySeVR/SySeVR.
Equipped with the new dataset, we show that SySeVR can
arXiv:1807.06756v1  [cs.LG]  18 Jul 2018
2
make deep learning detect vulnerabilities. Some ﬁndings are:
(1) SySeVR can make multiple kinds of deep neural networks
detect various kinds of vulnerabilities. SySeVR makes Bidirec-
tional RNNs, especially the Bidirectional Gated Recurrent Unit
(BGRU), more effective than CNNs, and makes CNNs more
effective than DBNs. Moreover, SySeVR renders deep neural
networks (especially BGRU) much more effective than the
state-of-the-art vulnerability detection methods. (2) In terms
of explaining the cause of false-positives and false-negatives,
we ﬁnd that the effectiveness of BGRU is substantially af-
fected by the training data. If some syntax elements (e.g.,
tokens) often appear in vulnerable (vs. not vulnerable) pieces
of code, then these syntax elements may cause high false-
positives (correspondingly, false-negatives). (3) It is better to
use deep neural networks that are tailored to speciﬁc kind of
vulnerabilities than to use a single deep neural network to
detect various kinds of vulnerabilities. (4) The more semantic
information accommodated for learning deep neural networks,
the higher vulnerability detection capability the learned neural
networks. For example, semantic information induced by con-
trol dependency can reduce the false-negative rate by 19.6%
on average. (5) By applying SySeVR-enabled BGRU to 4
software products (Libav, Seamonkey, Thunderbird, and Xen),
we detect 15 vulnerabilities that have not been reported in
NVD [22]. Among these 15 vulnerabilities, 7 are unknown
to exist in these software despite that similar vulnerabilities
are known to exist in other software); for ethical reasons, we
do not release their precise locations, but we have reported
them to the respective vendors. The other 8 vulnerabilities
have been “silently” patched by the vendors when releasing
newer versions of the products.
Paper outline. Section II presents the SySeVR framework.
Section III describes experiments and results. Section IV
discusses limitations of the present study. Section V reviews
related prior work. Section VI concludes the paper.
II. THE SYSEVR FRAMEWORK
A. The Domain Gap
Deep learning is successful in the domain of image pro-
cessing and other applications, which is however different
from the domain of vulnerability detection. In order to clearly
see the gap between these domains (i.e., the “domain gap”),
let us consider the example of using deep learning to detect
human in an image. As illustrated in Figure 1(a), this can be
achieved by using the notion of region proposal [24], [25] and
leveraging the structural representation of images (e.g., texture,
edge, and color). Multiple region proposals can be extracted
from one image, and each region proposal can be treated as
a “unit” for training neural networks to detect objects (i.e.,
human in this example). When using deep learning to detect
vulnerabilities, there is no natural structural representation for
programs like what region proposal is to images. This means
that deep learning cannot be directly used for vulnerability
detection.
B. The Framework
Overview. In order to bridge the domain gap, one may suggest
treating each function in a program as a region proposal in
image processing. However, this is too coarse-grained because
vulnerability detectors not only need to tell whether a function
is vulnerable or not, but also need to pin down the locations of
vulnerabilities. That is, we need ﬁner-grained representation of
programs for vulnerability detection. On the other hand, one
may suggest treating each line of code (i.e., statement — the
two terms are used interchangeably in this paper) as a unit for
vulnerability detection. This treatment has two drawbacks: (i)
most statements in a program do not contain any vulnerability,
meaning that few samples are vulnerable; and (ii) multiple
statements that are semantically related to each other are not
considered as a whole.
Inspired by the notion of region proposal in image process-
ing, we propose dividing a program into smaller pieces of code
(i.e., a number of statements), which may exhibit the syntax
and semantics characteristics of vulnerabilities. This explains,
as highlighted in Figure 1(b), why the framework seeks SyVC,
SeVC, and vector representations of programs.
Running example. In order to help understand the details of
SySeVR, we use Figure 2 to highlight how SySeVR extracts
SyVCs, SeVCs, and vector representation of SeVCs. At a high
level, a SyVC, highlighted by a box in Figure 2, is a code
element that may or may not be vulnerable according to some
syntax characteristics of known vulnerabilities. A SeVC ex-
tends a SyVC to include statements (i.e., lines of code) that are
semantically related to the SyVC, where semantic information
is induced by control dependency and/or data dependency; this
SyVC→SeVC transformation is fairly involved and therefore
elaborated in Figure 3. Each SeVC is encoded into a vector
for input to deep neural networks.
1) Extracting SyVCs: We observe that most vulnerabilities
exhibit some simple syntax characteristics, such as function
call and pointer usage. Therefore, we propose using syntax
characteristics to identify SyVCs, which serve as a starting
point (i.e., SyVCs are not sufﬁcient for training deep learning
models because they accommodate no semantic information
of vulnerabilities). In order to deﬁne SyVC, we ﬁrst deﬁne:
Deﬁnition 1 (program, function, statement, token): A pro-
gram P is a set of functions f1, . . . , fη, denoted by P =
{f1, . . . , fη}. A function fi, where 1 ≤i ≤η, is an
ordered set of statements si,1, . . . , si,mi, denoted by fi =
{si,1, . . . , si,mi}. A statement si,j, where 1 ≤i ≤η and
1 ≤j ≤mi, is an ordered set of tokens ti,j,1, . . . , ti,j,wi,j,
denoted by si,j = {ti,j,1, . . . , ti,j,wi,j}. Note that tokens can
be identiﬁers, operators, constants, and keywords, and can be
extracted by lexical analysis.
Deﬁning SyVCs. Given a function fi, there are standard rou-
tines for generating its abstract syntax tree, which is denoted
by Ti. On Ti, the root corresponds to function fi, a leaf node
corresponds to a token ti,j,g (1 ≤g ≤wi,j), and an internal
node corresponds to a statement si,j or multiple consecutive
tokens of si,j. Intuitively, a SyVC is one token (corresponding
to a leaf node) or consists of multiple consecutive tokens
(corresponding to an internal node). Formally,
Deﬁnition 2 (SyVC): Consider a program P = {f1, . . ., fη},
where fi = {si,1, . . . , si,mi} with si,j = {ti,j,1, . . ., ti,j,wi,j}.
Given a set of vulnerability syntax characteristics, denoted by
H = {hk}1≤k≤β where β is the number of syntax character-
3
Output
SyVCs (Syntax-
based  
Vulnerability  
Candidates)
Vector 
representation 
of SeVCs
Training phase
Programs 
for learning
Target 
programs
Detection phase
Vulnerabilities
SeVCs 
(Semantics-
based  
Vulnerability 
Candidates)
Deep learning
Target images
Region proposals
Object of 
interest
Vector 
representation 
of images
(a) Deep learning for image processing (object detection)
(b) SySeVR: a framework for using deep learning to detect vulnerabilities
Training phase
Detection phase
Deep learning
Input
Images for learning
Fig. 1.
(a) The notion of region proposal in image processing. (b) The SySeVR framework inspired by the notion of region proposal and
centered at obtaining SyVC, SeVC, and vector representations of programs.
Program source code 
SyVCs (highlighted by boxes)
Vector representation of the 
example SeVC
7    void func()
9    char *data ; 
10  char dataBuffer[100]; 
11  char source[100]; 
13  memset(dataBuffer, 'A', 99); 
14  dataBuffer[99] = '\0';
16  while (1)
18  data = dataBuffer - 8;
22  memset(source, 'C', 99); 
23  source[99] = '\0'; 
24  memmove (data, source, 
      100*sizeof(char)); 
25  data[99] = '\0'; 
26  printLine(data); 
1    void printLine(const char * line)
3    if(line != NULL) 
4    printf("%s\n", line);
1  void printLine(const char * line)
2  {
3      if(line != NULL) 
4           printf("%s\n", line);
5   }
6
7  void func()
8  {
9     char *data;
10   char dataBuffer[100];
11   char source[100];
12   ...
13   memset(dataBuffer, 'A', 99);
14   dataBuffer[99] = '\0';
15   ...
16   while(1)
17   {
18        data = dataBuffer - 8;
19        break;
20    }
21   ...
22   memset(source, 'C', 99); 
23   source[99] = '\0'; 
24   memmove(data, source, 
       100*sizeof(char));
25   data[99] = '\0';
26   printLine(data);
27 }
SeVC representation: this 
example of SeVC corresponds 
to the SyVC “data” (line 25) 
and accommodates the other 
statements (i.e., lines of code) 
that are semantically related to 
the SyVC. This SyVCSeVC 
transformation is further 
elaborated in Figure 3.
1  void printLine(const char * line)
2  {
3      if(line != NULL) 
4           printf("%s\n", line);
5   }
6
7  void func()
8  {
9     char *data;
10   char dataBuffer[100];
11   char source[100];
12   ...
13   memset(dataBuffer, 'A', 99);
14   dataBuffer[99] = '\0';
15   ...
16   while(1)
17   {
18        data = dataBuffer - 8;
19        break;
20    }
21   ...
22   memset(source, 'C', 99); 
23   source[99] = '\0'; 
24   memmove(data, source, 
       100*sizeof(char));
25   data[99] = '\0';
26   printLine(data);
27 }
[array([1.2127248, 0.09549687, 
-0.05936106, -0.115688 , 
-0.16013387, ...], dtype=float32), 
array([1.01583385, -0.46685755, 
-0.23064175, 0.54472417, 
0.16240177, ...], dtype=float32), 
array([1.01583385, -0.46685755, 
-0.23064175, 0.54472417, 
0.16240177, ...], dtype=float32),
array([-0.19560172, -0.49783102, 
1.01025033, 0.1692847, 
-0.65818149, ...], dtype=float32),
 ..., 
 ..., 
array([1.08994234, -0.19623509, 
-0.11468308, 0.11434121, 
-0.14202058, ...], dtype=float32)]
Fig. 2. An example illustrating SyVC, SeVC, and vector representations of program, where SyVCs are highlighted by boxes and one SyVC
may be part of another SyVC. The SyVC→SeVC transformation is elaborated in Figure 3.
istics, a code element ei,j,z is composed of one or multiple
consecutive tokens of si,j, namely ei,j,z = (ti,j,u, . . . , ti,j,v)
where 1 ≤u ≤v ≤wi,j. A code element ei,j,z is called
a SyVC if it matches some vulnerability syntax characteristic
hk.
Note that different kinds of vulnerabilities would have
different syntax characteristics. For example, vulnerabilities
related to library/API function calls have the following syntax
characteristic: a function on Ti is a “callee” (indicating a
function call). In Section III, we will show how to extract
vulnerability syntax characteristics and determine whether a
code element matches a syntax characteristic or not.
Algorithm for computing SyVCs. Given a program P =
{f1, . . . , fη} and a set H = {hk}1≤k≤β of vulnerability
syntax characteristics, Algorithm 1 extracts SyVCs from P
as follows. First, Algorithm 1 uses a standard routine to
generate an abstract syntax tree Ti for each function fi. Then,
Algorithm 1 traverses Ti to identify SyVCs, namely the code
elements that match some hk. We defer the details to Section
III-B1, because different vulnerability syntax characteristics
Algorithm 1 Extracting SyVCs from a program
Input:
A program P = {f1, . . . , fη}; a set H = {hk}1≤k≤β of
vulnerability syntax characteristics
Output:
A set Y of SyVCs
1: Y ←∅;
2: for each function fi ∈P do
3:
Generate an abstract syntax tree Ti for fi;
4:
for each code element ei,j,z in Ti do
5:
for each hk ∈H do
6:
if ei,j,z matches hk then
7:
Y ←Y ∪{ei,j,z};
8:
end if
9:
end for
10:
end for
11: end for
12: return Y ; {the set of SyVCs}
need different matching methods.
Running example. In the second column of Figure 2, we
use boxes to highlight all of the SyVCs that are extracted
from the program source code using the vulnerability syntax
characteristics that will be described in Section III-B1. We


--- END OF 1. A framework for using DL to detec t software vulnerabilities..pdf ---



--- START OF 2. Automated Vul Detection using DL using deep representation learning.pdf ---

17th IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (IEEE ICMLA 2018), Orlando, Florida, USA
Automated Vulnerability Detection in Source Code
Using Deep Representation Learning
Rebecca L. Russell1*, Louis Kim1, Lei H. Hamilton1, Tomo Lazovich1†,
Jacob A. Harer1,2, Onur Ozdemir1, Paul M. Ellingwood1, Marc W. McConley1
1 Draper
2 Boston University
Abstract— Increasing numbers of software vulnerabilities are
discovered every year whether they are reported publicly or
discovered internally in proprietary code. These vulnerabilities
can pose serious risk of exploit and result in system compromise,
information leaks, or denial of service. We leveraged the wealth
of C and C++ open-source code available to develop a large-
scale function-level vulnerability detection system using machine
learning. To supplement existing labeled vulnerability datasets,
we compiled a vast dataset of millions of open-source functions
and labeled it with carefully-selected ﬁndings from three different
static analyzers that indicate potential exploits. The labeled
dataset is available at: https://osf.io/d45bw/. Using these datasets,
we developed a fast and scalable vulnerability detection tool based
on deep feature representation learning that directly interprets
lexed source code. We evaluated our tool on code from both
real software packages and the NIST SATE IV benchmark
dataset. Our results demonstrate that deep feature representation
learning on source code is a promising approach for automated
software vulnerability detection.
Index Terms—artiﬁcial neural networks, computer security,
data mining, machine learning
I. INTRODUCTION
Hidden ﬂaws in software can result in security vulnera-
bilities that potentially allow attackers to compromise sys-
tems and applications. Thousands of such vulnerabilities are
reported publicly to the Common Vulnerabilities and Expo-
sures database [1] each year and many more are discov-
ered internally in proprietary code and patched. Recent high-
proﬁle exploits have shown that these security holes can have
disastrous effects, both ﬁnancially and societally [5]. These
vulnerabilities are often caused by subtle errors made by
programmers and can propagate quickly due to the prevalence
of open-source software and code reuse.
While there are existing tools for program analysis, these
tools typically only detect a limited subset of possible er-
rors based on pre-deﬁned rules. With the recent widespread
availability of open-source repositories, it has become pos-
sible to use data-driven techniques to discover vulnerability
patterns. We present machine learning (ML) techniques for
*Correspondence to: rrussell@draper.com
†Tomo Lazovich now works at Lightmatter
the automated detection of vulnerabilities in C/C++1 source
code learned from real world code examples.
II. RELATED WORK
There currently exist a wide variety of analysis tools that
attempt to uncover common vulnerabilities in software. Static
analyzers, such as Clang [7], do so without needing to execute
programs. Dynamic analyzers repeatedly execute programs
with many test inputs on real or virtual processors to identify
weaknesses. Both static and dynamic analyzers are rule-based
tools and thus limited to their hand-engineered rules and not
able to guarantee full test coverage of codebases. Symbolic
execution [8] replaces input data with symbolic values and
analyzes their use over the control ﬂow graph of a program.
While it can probe all feasible program paths, symbolic exe-
cution is expensive and does not scale well to large programs.
Beyond these traditional tools, there has been signiﬁcant
recent work on the usage of machine learning for program
analysis. The availability of large amounts of open-source
code opens the opportunity to learn the patterns of software
vulnerabilities directly from mined data. For a comprehensive
review of learning from “Big Code”, including that not directly
related to our work, see Allamanis et al. [9].
In the area of vulnerability detection, Hovsepyan et al. [10]
used a support vector machine (SVM) on a bag-of-words
(BOW) representation of a simple tokenization of Java source
code to predict static analyzer labels. However, their work
was limited to training and evaluating on a single software
repository. Pang et al. [11] expanded on this work by including
n-grams in the feature vectors used with the SVM classiﬁer.
Mou et al. [12] explored the potential of deep learning for
program analysis by embedding the nodes of the abstract
syntax tree representations of source code and training a
tree-based convolutional neural network for simple supervised
classiﬁcation problems. Li et al. [13] used a recurrent neural
network (RNN) trained on code snippets related to library/API
function calls to detect two types of vulnerabilities related to
the improper usage of those calls. Harer et al. [14] trained
an RNN to detect vulnerabilities in the lexed representations
1While our work focuses on C/C++, the techniques are applicable to any
programming language.
arXiv:1807.04320v2  [cs.LG]  28 Nov 2018
of functions in a synthetic codebase, as part of a generative
adversarial approach to code repair.
To our knowledge, no work has been done on using deep
learning to learn features directly from source code in a large
natural codebase to detect a variety of vulnerabilities. The
limited datasets (in both size and variety) used by most of
the previous works limit the usefulness of the results and
prevent them from taking full advantage of the power of deep
learning.
III. DATA
Given the complexity and variety of programs, a large
number of training examples are required to train machine
learning models that can effectively learn the patterns of
security vulnerabilities directly from code. We chose to an-
alyze software packages at the function-level because it is
the lowest level of granularity capturing the overall ﬂow of a
subroutine. We compiled a vast dataset of millions of function-
level examples of C and C++ code from the SATE IV Juliet
Test Suite [6], Debian Linux distribution [15], and public Git
repositories on GitHub [16]. Table I shows the data summary
of the number of functions we collected and used from each
source in our dataset of over 12 million functions.
SATE IV
GitHub
Debian
Total
121,353
9,706,269
3,046,758
Passing curation
11,896
782,493
491,873
‘Not vulnerable’
6,503 (55%)
730,160 (93%)
461,795 (94%)
‘Vulnerable’
5,393 (45%)
52,333 (7%)
30,078 (6%)
TABLE I: Total number of functions obtained from each
data source, the number of valid functions remaining after
removing duplicates and applying cuts, and the number of
functions without and with detected vulnerabilities.
The SATE IV Juliet Test Suite contains synthetic code
examples with vulnerabilities from 118 different Common
Weakness Enumeration (CWE) [1] classes and was originally
designed to explore the performance of static and dynamic
analyzers. While the SATE IV dataset provides labeled exam-
ples of many types of vulnerabilities, it is made up of synthetic
code snippets that do not sufﬁciently cover the space of natural
code to provide an appropriate training set alone. To provide a
vast dataset of natural code to augment the SATE IV data, we
mined large numbers of functions from Debian packages and
public Git repositories. The Debian package releases provide
a selection of very well-managed and curated code which is
in use on many systems today. The GitHub dataset provides a
larger quantity and wider variety of (often lower-quality) code.
Since the open-source functions from Debian and GitHub are
not labeled, we used a suite of static analysis tools to generate
the labels. Details of the label generation are explained in
Subsection III-C.
A. Source lexing
To generate useful features from the raw source code of
each function, we created a custom C/C++ lexer designed to
capture the relevant meaning of critical tokens while keeping
the representation generic and minimizing the total token
vocabulary size. Making our lexed representation of code
from different software repositories as standardized as possible
empowers transfer learning across the full dataset. Standard
lexers, designed for actually compiling code, capture far too
much detail that can lead to overﬁtting in ML approaches.
Our lexer was able to reduce C/C++ code to representations
using a total vocabulary size of only 156 tokens. All base
C/C++ keywords, operators, and separators are included in
the vocabulary. Code that does not affect compilation, such
as comments, is stripped out. String, character, and ﬂoat
literals are lexed to type-speciﬁc placeholder tokens, as are all
identiﬁers. Integer literals are tokenized digit-by-digit, as these
values are frequently relevant to vulnerabilities. Types and
function calls from common libraries that are likely to have
relevance to vulnerabilities are mapped to generic versions. For
example, u32, uint32_t, UINT32, uint32, and DWORD
are all lexed as the same generic token representing 32-bit
unsigned data types. Learned embeddings of these individual
tokens would likely distinguish them based on the kind of code
they are commonly used in, so care was taken to build in the
desired invariance.
B. Data curation
One very important step of our data preparation was
the removal of potential duplicate functions. Open-source
repositories often have functions duplicated across different
packages. Such duplication can artiﬁcially inﬂate performance
metrics and conceal overﬁtting, as training data can leak into
test sets. Likewise, there are many functions that are near
duplicates, containing trivial changes in source code that do
not signiﬁcantly affect the execution of the function. These
near duplicates are challenging to remove, as they can often
appear in very different code repositories and can look quite
different at the raw source level.
To protect against these issues, we performed an extremely
strict duplicate removal process. We removed any function
with a duplicated lexed representation of its source code or
a duplicated compile-level feature vector. This compile-level
feature vector was created by extracting the control ﬂow graph
of the function as well as the operations happening in each
basic block (opcode vector, or op-vec) and the deﬁnition and
use of variables (use-def matrix)2. Two functions with iden-
tical instruction-level behaviors or functionality are likely to
have both similar lexed representations and highly correlated
vulnerability status.
The “Passing curation” row of Table I reﬂects the number
of functions remaining after the duplicate removal process,
about 10.8% of the total number of functions pulled. Although
our strict duplicate removal process ﬁlters out a signiﬁcant
amount of data, this approach provides the most conservative
2Our compile-level feature extraction framework incorporated modiﬁed
variants of strace and buildbot as well as a custom Clang plugin – we omit
the details to focus on the ML aspects of our work.
CWE ID
CWE Description
Frequency %
120/121/122
Buffer Overﬂow
38.2%
119
Improper Restriction of Operations within the Bounds of a Memory Buffer
18.9%
476
NULL Pointer Dereference
9.5%
469
Use of Pointer Subtraction to Determine Size
2.0%
20, 457, 805 etc.
Improper Input Validation, Use of Uninitialized Variable, Buffer Access with Incorrect Length Value, etc.
31.4%
TABLE II: CWE statistics of vulnerabilities detected in our C/C++ dataset.
performance results, closely estimating how well our tool will
perform against code it has never seen before.
C. Labels
Labeling code vulnerability at the function level was a
signiﬁcant challenge. The bulk of our dataset was made up
of mined open-source code without known ground truth. In
order to generate labels, we pursued three approaches: static
analysis, dynamic analysis, and commit-message/bug-report
tagging.
While dynamic analysis is capable of exposing subtle ﬂaws
by executing functions with a wide range of possible inputs, it
is extremely resource intensive. Performing a dynamic analysis
on the roughly 400 functions in a single module of the LibTIFF
3.8.2 package from the ManyBugs dataset [17] took nearly a
day of effort. Therefore, this approach was not realistic for
our extremely large dataset.
Commit-message based labeling turned out to be very
challenging, providing low-quality labels. In our tests, both
humans and ML algorithms were poor at using commit mes-
sages to predict corresponding Travis CI [18] build failures or
ﬁxes. Motivated by recent work by Zhou et al. [19], we also
tried a simple keyword search looking for commit words like
“buggy”, “broken”, “error”, “ﬁxed”, etc. to label before-and-
after pairs of functions, which yielded better results in terms of
relevancy. However, this approach greatly reduced the number
of candidate functions that we could label and still required
signiﬁcant manual inspection, making it inappropriate for our
vast dataset.
As a result, we decided to use three open-source static ana-
lyzers, Clang, Cppcheck [20], and Flawﬁnder [21], to generate
labels. Each static analyzer varies in its scope of search and
detection. For example, Clang’s scope is very broad but also
picks up on syntax, programming style, and other ﬁndings
which are not likely to result in a vulnerability. Flawﬁnder’s
scope is geared towards CWEs and does not focus on other
aspects such as style. Therefore, we incorporated multiple
static analyzers and pruned their outputs to exclude ﬁndings
that are not typically associated with security vulnerabilities
in an effort to create robust labels.
We had a team of security researchers map each static
analyzer’s ﬁnding categories to the corresponding CWEs and
identify which CWEs would likely result in potential security
vulnerabilities. This process allowed us to generate binary
labels of “vulnerable” and “not vulnerable”, depending on the
CWE. For example, Clang’s “Out-of-bound array access” ﬁnd-
ing was mapped to “CWE-805: Buffer Access with Incorrect
Length Value”, an exploitable vulnerability that can lead to
program crashes, so functions with this ﬁnding were labeled
“vulnerable”. On the other hand, Cppcheck’s “Unused struct
member” ﬁnding was mapped to “CWE-563: Assignment
to Variable without Use”, a poor code practice unlikely to
cause a security vulnerability, so corresponding functions were
labeled “not vulnerable” even though static analyzers ﬂagged
them. Of the 390 total types of ﬁndings from the static
analyzers, 149 were determined to result in a potential security
vulnerability. Roughly 6.8% of our curated, mined C/C++
functions triggered a vulnerability-related ﬁnding. Table II
shows the statistics of frequent CWEs in these “vulnerable”
functions. All open-source function source codes from Debian
and GitHub with corresponding CWE labels are available here:
https://osf.io/d45bw/.
IV. METHODS
Our primary machine learning approach to vulnerability
detection, depicted in Figure 1, combines the neural feature
representations of lexed function source code with a powerful
ensemble classiﬁer, random forest (RF).
A. Neural network classiﬁcation and representation learning
Since source code shares some commonalities with writing
and work done for programming languages is more limited, we
build off approaches developed for natural language processing
(NLP) [22]. We leverage feature-extraction approaches similar
to those used for sentence sentiment classiﬁcation with convo-
lutional neural networks (CNNs) and recurrent neural networks
(RNNs) for function-level source vulnerability classiﬁcation.
1) Embedding: The tokens making up the lexed functions
are ﬁrst embedded into a ﬁxed k-dimensional representation
(limited to range [−1, 1]) that is learned during classiﬁcation
training via backpropagation to a linear transformation of
a one-hot embedding. Several unsupervised word2vec ap-
proaches [23] trained on a much larger unlabeled dataset were
explored for seeding this embedding, but these yielded mini-
mal improvement in classiﬁcation performance over randomly-
initialized learned embeddings. A ﬁxed one-hot embedding
was also tried, but gave diminished results. As our vocabulary
size is much smaller than those of natural languages, we
were able to use a much smaller embedding than is typical
in NLP applications. Our experiments found that k = 13
performed the best for supervised embedding sizes, balanc-
ing the expressiveness of the embedding against overﬁtting.
We found that adding a small amount of random Gaussian
noise N
 µ = 0, σ2 = 0.01

to each embedded representation


--- END OF 2. Automated Vul Detection using DL using deep representation learning.pdf ---



--- START OF 3.Vulnerability Detection with Graph Simplification.pdf ---

Vulnerability Detection with Graph Simpliﬁcation
and Enhanced Graph Representation Learning
Xin-Cheng Wen1⋆, Yupan Chen1⋆, Cuiyun Gao1∗, Hongyu Zhang2, Jie M. Zhang3, Qing Liao1◦
1 School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2 School of Big Data and Software Engineering, Chongqing University, China
3 Department of Informatics, King’s College London, UK
xiamenwxc@foxmail.com, cyp36889@gmail.com, gaocuiyun@hit.edu.cn,
hyzhang@cqu.edu.cn, jie.zhang@kcl.ac.uk, liaoqing@hit.edu.cn
Abstract—Prior studies have demonstrated the effectiveness
of Deep Learning (DL) in automated software vulnerability
detection. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have proven effective
in learning the graph representations of source code and are
commonly adopted by existing DL-based vulnerability detection
methods. However, the existing methods are still limited by the
fact that GNNs are essentially difﬁcult to handle the connections
between long-distance nodes in a code structure graph. Besides,
they do not well exploit the multiple types of edges in a code
structure graph (such as edges representing data ﬂow and
control ﬂow). Consequently, despite achieving state-of-the-art
performance, the existing GNN-based methods tend to fail to
capture global information (i.e., long-range dependencies among
nodes) of code graphs.
To mitigate these issues, in this paper, we propose a novel
vulnerability detection framework with grAph siMpliﬁcation
and enhanced graph rePresentation LEarning, named AMPLE.
AMPLE mainly contains two parts: 1) graph simpliﬁcation,
which aims at reducing the distances between nodes by shrinking
the node sizes of code structure graphs; 2) enhanced graph
representation learning, which involves one edge-aware graph
convolutional network module for fusing heterogeneous edge
information into node representations and one kernel-scaled
representation module for well capturing the relations between
distant graph nodes. Experiments on three public benchmark
datasets show that AMPLE outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods by 0.39%-35.32% and 7.64%-199.81% with respect to
the accuracy and F1 score metrics, respectively. The results
demonstrate the effectiveness of AMPLE in learning global
information of code graphs for vulnerability detection.
Index Terms—Software vulnerability, graph simpliﬁcation,
graph representation learning
I. INTRODUCTION
Software vulnerabilities are weaknesses in source code
that can be exploited to cause safety issues such as user
information leakage [1] and cyber extortion [2]. The number
of disclosed vulnerabilities constantly increases, causing more
and more signiﬁcant concerns in the ﬁeld of software industry
and cybersecurity. For example, the National Vulnerability
⋆These authors contribute to the work equally and are co-ﬁrst authors of
the paper.
∗Corresponding author. The author is also afﬁliated with Peng Cheng
Laboratory and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security
Intelligence Technologies.
◦The author is also afﬁliated with Peng Cheng Laboratory.
Database (NVD) in the US [3] released 8,051 vulnerabilities
in the ﬁrst quarter of 2022, with an increase of 25% over
the same period last year [4]. Most recently, Synopsys Open
Source Security and Risk Analysis (OSSRA) analyzed 2,409
codebases and found that 81% of them contained at least one
known open source vulnerability [5]. The severity and preva-
lence of software vulnerabilities make it critical to develop
accurate automatic vulnerability detection techniques.
Conventional
vulnerability
detection
methods
[6]–[10]
mainly adopt pre-deﬁned rules provided by human experts to
conduct code analysis, which are labor intensive and inaccu-
rate. Recently, many Deep Learning (DL)-based vulnerabil-
ity detection methods have been proposed [11]–[15], which
achieve state-of-the-art performance in vulnerability detection
via automatically learning the patterns of vulnerable code
without human heuristics. The DL-based methods [11]–[14]
generally leverage the structural information of source code
and represent code as a code structure graph such as Control
Flow Graph (CFG), Data Flow Graph (DFG), and Code
Property Graph (CPG) [16]. The information in these graphs
can also be integrated with Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) and
Natural Code Sequence (NCS) to provide more comprehensive
graph representations [17].
Code structure graphs typically contain complex hierar-
chical information [18], [19]. To effectively learn the repre-
sentations of code structure graphs, state-of-the-art DL-based
methods utilize a variety of Graph Neural Network (GNN)
models such as Gated Graph Neural Network (GGNN) [20]
and Graph Convolution Network (GCN) [21]. However, it
is well acknowledged that GNN models have limitations in
handling long-distance connections between nodes that are not
directly adjacent to each other [22], [23]. Although one can use
GNNs with stacked multiple layers to learn global information
(i.e., long-range dependencies among nodes) of the graph, the
over-smoothing issue [24], [25] yielded from a deep GNN will
lead to similar embeddings for nodes with different labels,
thereby degrading the overall performance [26]. Moreover,
the code structure graphs typically contain multiple types of
relations (e.g., edges representing data ﬂow and control ﬂow)
[20], [21]. The existing GNN models (e.g. GGNN, GCN [27])
cannot adequately model the edge features in a graph [28],
arXiv:2302.04675v1  [cs.SE]  9 Feb 2023
(0,50]
(50,100]
(100,150]
(150,200]
>200
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Devign Accuracy
DELTA Accuracy
Node Number
Accuracy
Fig. 1: Accuracy of Devign [17] and AMPLE on the Reveal
dataset [20] with different numbers of graph nodes.
which further limits their capability to capture global infor-
mation of a code structure graph. Therefore, despite achieving
state-of-the-art performance, existing DL-based models still
have difﬁculties in capturing the global information of source
code, which hinders their performance in detecting software
vulnerabilities especially for complex graphs.
Taking Devign [17], a recent GNN-based vulnerability
detection model as an example, we analyze the relationship
between model performance and the number of graph nodes.
Devign learns vulnerable code patterns from code structure
graphs that contain four types of edges (AST, CFG, DFG,
and NCS). We experiment on the Reveal dataset [20]. The
data in the test set are divided into ﬁve intervals based on the
number of nodes in code structure graphs, with results shown
in Figure 1. As can be seen, Devign shows obviously better
performance for the graphs with fewer nodes, e.g., achieving
90% accuracy for graphs with no more than 50 nodes, and
drops severely as the number of nodes increases. For the
graphs with more than 200 nodes, the accuracy of Devign
is only around 54%. The results indicate the ineffectiveness
of current methods in learning global code information.
In this paper, we propose AMPLE, a novel vulnerability
detection framework with grAph siMpliﬁcation and enhanced
graph rePresentation LEarning. AMPLE contains two major
parts: 1) Graph simpliﬁcation, which reduces the distances
between nodes by shrinking the sizes of code structure graphs.
2) Enhance graph representation learning, which includes
two modules. The edge-aware graph neural network module
considers the information of edge types and fuses the hetero-
geneous edge information into node representations; while the
kernel-scaled representation module scales up the convolution
kernel size for explicitly capturing the relationship between
distant graph nodes.
To evaluate AMPLE, we use three widely-studied bench-
mark datasets in software vulnerability detection: FFM-
Peg+Qemu [17], Reveal [20], and Fan et al. [29]. We compare
AMPLE with six existing software vulnerability detection
methods, including three state-of-the-art graph-based and three
token-based methods. The results demonstrate that AMPLE
outperforms all the baseline methods with respect to the
accuracy and F1 score metrics. In particular, AMPLE achieves
4.75%, 6.86%, and 9.24% absolute improvement in F1 score
over the state-of-the-art on the three datasets, respectively, with
the corresponding relative improvements at 7.63%, 16.48%,
and 40.40%.
In summary, the major contributions of this paper are as
follows:
1) We propose AMPLE, a novel vulnerability detection
framework. AMPLE involves a new code input represen-
tation for reducing the distances between nodes and an
enhanced graph representation learning method for better
capturing the information code structure graphs.
2) We perform a large-scale evaluation of AMPLE on three
public benchmark datasets, and the results demonstrate
the effectiveness of AMPLE in accurate vulnerability
detection.
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II introduces the background and related work. Section III
presents the overall architecture of AMPLE and the two parts
in detail, including graph simpliﬁcation and enhanced graph
representation learning. Section IV describes the experimental
setup, including datasets, baselines and experimental settings.
Section V introduces the experimental results and analysis.
Section VI discusses why AMPLE can effectively detect code
vulnerability and the threats to validity. Section VII concludes
this paper.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In this section, we introduce the background and related
work about vulnerability detection, from the perspectives of
the code representation and deep learning models.
A. Code Representation in Vulnerability Detection
Early DL-based vulnerability detection methods [11], [12],
[14], [32], [33] regard source code as ﬂat sequences and adopt
natural language processing techniques for representing the
input code. They generally initialize the embeddings of tokens
with word2vec [34]. Despite that these methods do not require
code integrity and syntax correctness, they neglect the inherent
structural regularity of code, and may only focus on shallow
semantics [17]. To well exploit the structural information of
code, a series of methods [13], [15], [20], [21], [35]–[39]
abstract the code in the form of graphs (e.g. AST, CFG,
DFG, PDG) and use the graphs as the model input. Following
the work of Devign [17], we construct a comprehensive code
structure graph, which is treated as a heterogeneous graph to
obtain the semantic and syntactic information represented by
different edge types. We further simplify the code structure
graph to shrink the graph size and boost the model to learn
the global representation.
B. Deep-learning Models for Vulnerability Detection
The neural networks used in early work include Convolu-
tional Neural Network (CNN) [40], [41] and Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN) [42], [43]. For example, Russell et al. [12]
input the lexical code representation into CNN. Vuldeepecker
2
···
Edge-aware GCN module
Kernel-scaled  
representation module
+
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
···
Multi-head
attention
Edge-enhanced node 
representation matrix
Large kernel conv
Small kernel conv
BN
BN
Conv
Conv
(2) Variable-based
graph simplification
 
 Simplified code 
structure graph
Edge (in)
Edge (self-loop)
Edge (out)
Source code  
Code structure graph
×2 Layers
Edge weight
Node vector
···
···
······
(1) Type-based
graph simplification
 (B) Enhanced graph representation learning
 (A) Graph simplification
 
Fig. 2: Architecture of AMPLE, which mainly contains two parts: (A) graph simpliﬁcation and (B) enhanced graph
representation learning. Nodes with different colors in the simpliﬁed code structure graph indicate their edge types are different,
e.g., edges of CFG or DFG. Conv [30] represents convolutional layer. BN [31] is the batch normalization layer.
[11] employs BiLSTM to handle the code gadgets, a ﬁne-
grained code slice. Some work [13], [44] also selects LSTM as
code encoders. Recently, GNN-based methods [17], [20], [21]
have achieved state-of-the-art performance on vulnerability
detection. GNN [45], [46] is a type of neural network which
directly operates on graph structure. Devign [17] and Reveal
[20] adopt GGNN [47] to process multiple directed graphs
generated from source code. However, GGNN converts differ-
ent edge types into an adjacency matrix without distinguishing
them, leading to limited performance as the number of edge
types increases [48]. IVDetect [21] leverages Graph Convo-
lutional Network (GCN) and uses a context vector to predict
vulnerabilities. However, GCN focuses on learning the local
features of nodes by neighborhood aggregation, and thereby
tends to fail to capture long-range dependencies among nodes
as the graph sizes increase [49]. In this work, we aim at
mitigating the issues of GNNs for better learning the global
information of code structure graphs in vulnerability detection.
III. AMPLE FRAMEWORK
In this section, we introduce the detailed architecture of
AMPLE. As shown in Figure 2, AMPLE mainly consists
of two parts: (A) Graph simpliﬁcation (c.f., Section III-A),
which condenses the repetitive information in code structure
graph through type-based graph simpliﬁcation and variable-
based graph simpliﬁcation; (B) Enhanced graph representation
learning, which contains the edge-aware graph convolutional
network module (c.f., Section III-B1) to learn edge-enhanced
node representations and the kernel-scaled representation mod-
ule (c.f., Section III-B2) to capture the relations between
distant graph nodes.
TABLE I: Merging rules in type-based graph simpliﬁcation.
“PType” and “CType” indicate the types of the parent and
child nodes of a directed edge, respectively. The * represents
any node type, and the PType “Augment” in Rule 6 represents
the parameters of function call statements.
Rule
PType
CType
1
ExpressionStatement
AssignmentExpression
UnaryExpression
CallExpression
PostIncDecOperationExpression
2
IdentiﬁerDeclStatement
IdentiﬁerDecl
3
Condition
*
4
ForInit
*
5
CallExpression
ArgumentList
6
Argument
*
7
Callee
Identiﬁer
A. Graph Simpliﬁcation
The graph simpliﬁcation part aims at condensing the repet-
itive information in a code structure graph, which can shrink
graph sizes and reduce the distances between nodes. We pro-
pose two simpliﬁcation steps: type-based graph simpliﬁcation
(according to node types) followed by variable-based graph
3


--- END OF 3.Vulnerability Detection with Graph Simplification.pdf ---



--- START OF 5.VulBERTa Deep Learning for Vulnerability Detection.pdf ---

VulBERTa: Simpliﬁed Source Code Pre-Training
for Vulnerability Detection
Hazim Hanif
Department of Computing
Imperial College London, UK;
Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology,
University of Malaya, Malaysia
m.md-hanif19@imperial.ac.uk
Sergio Maffeis
Department of Computing
Imperial College London, UK
sergio.maffeis@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract—This paper presents VulBERTa, a deep learning
approach to detect security vulnerabilities in source code. Our
approach pre-trains a RoBERTa model with a custom tokeni-
sation pipeline on real-world code from open-source C/C++
projects. The model learns a deep knowledge representation
of the code syntax and semantics, which we leverage to train
vulnerability detection classiﬁers. We evaluate our approach on
binary and multi-class vulnerability detection tasks across several
datasets (Vuldeepecker, Draper, REVEAL and muVuldeepecker)
and benchmarks (CodeXGLUE and D2A). The evaluation results
show that VulBERTa achieves state-of-the-art performance and
outperforms existing approaches across different datasets, despite
its conceptual simplicity, and limited cost in terms of size of
training data and number of model parameters.
Index Terms—Vulnerability detection, Software vulnerabilites,
Pre-training, Deep learning, Representation learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
MITRE [1] reports an increase in the number of software
CVEs submitted yearly since 2016, reﬂecting the increased
threat to the overall security of the software ecosystem.
Accordingly, there has been a steady growth of research in
software vulnerability detection over the years [2], across
the spectrum of vulnerability detection approaches such as
static analysis, dynamic analysis and machine learning-based
detection models.
Deep learning has obtained encouraging results for software
vulnerability, in particular using sequence- and graph-based
techniques such as Bidirectional-LSTM [3]–[5] and Graph
Neural Networks [6], [7]. These techniques attempt to embed
syntactic and semantic information from the code explicitly,
for example by using various dependency and data ﬂow analy-
ses to preprocess source code and extract various artefact such
as code gadgets, control ﬂow graphs and dependency graphs
which are eventually fed to the respective neural network.
In this paper, we follow a different approach inspired by
the recent successes of Transformer-based neural architec-
tures [8]–[12] able to learn deep representation knowledge of
natural language textual data. Our aim is to build a repre-
sentation model of C/C++ that embeds syntactic and semantic
information about the language without our direct intervention,
Accepted as a conference paper at IJCNN 2022.
and then use that model as a basis to build vulnerability
detection models using standard neural architectures.
We present VulBERTa, which aims to learn a deep represen-
tation of C/C++ source code from large codebases that consist
of different software projects. To facilitate learning the internal
code representation, we need to create a language-aware
reliable tokenisation pipeline, to parse and tokenise source
code while ensuring that basic, yet key syntactic and semantic
information is made available to the model. In our tokenisation
pipeline, we implemented several novel features to enhance
the tokenisation ability of the existing Byte-pair Encoding
(BPE) [13] tokeniser. We introduce a custom tokeniser that
combines BPE with custom pre-deﬁned code tokens to build
the vocabulary of our tokeniser. These pre-deﬁned tokens are
based on the AST node type of Clang [14] (standard keywords
and punctuation) and lists of common C/C++ API function
names. Our custom tokenisation pipeline creates a better code
representation while maintaining its original syntactic structure
even after being encoded.
VulBERTa implements a Transformer-based deep learning
architecture called RoBERTa [15]. VulBERTa builds its code
representation knowledge via Masked Language Modelling
(MLM) [9]. We pre-train VulBERTa on fewer samples (2.28
million) and model parameters (125 million) than existing
approaches [16], [17]. Then, we connect the pre-trained
VulBERTa model with alternatively a MultiLayer Percep-
tron (VulBERTa-MLP) and a Convolutional Neural Network
(VulBERTa-CNN) in order to ﬁne-tune vulnerability detection
models.
We evaluate VulBERTa across different datasets to test
the performance and transferability of our pre-trained model.
The evaluation results show that we achieve state-of-the-art
detection performance across these datasets. In particular, we
achieved an F1 score of 57.92% on the Draper [18] dataset,
outperforming existing approaches, which is encouraging as
this dataset is considered challenging due to being imbalanced
and having a mix of real-world and synthetic samples. Vul-
BERTa also performs well on multi-class classiﬁcation task
on the easier muVuldeepecker [5] dataset, with a weighted F1
score of 99.59%. We also tested VulBERTa on two software
vulnerability detection benchmarks (CodeXGLUE and D2A),
arXiv:2205.12424v1  [cs.CR]  25 May 2022
where it outperforms most existing approaches, despite using
less training data and fewer model parameters. These results
show that VulBERTa is effective in learning a deep repre-
sentation of source code, and using that knowledge to detect
software vulnerabilities.
In summary, our main contributions are:
• A custom tokenisation pipeline which combines the BPE
algorithm with novel pre-deﬁned code tokens (standard
C/C++ keywords, punctuation and library API calls),
providing better code encodings while maintaining the
syntactical structure of source code.
• A small and simpliﬁed pre-trained model, (VulBERTa)
that provides transferability of pre-trained embedding
weights, which is reusable in less complex architectures
such as MLP and CNN.
• Software vulnerability detection models, VulBERTa-MLP
and VulBERTa-CNN that achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA)
detection performance across different datasets and top-3
positions in two benchmarks (CodeXGLUE and D2A).
Our code and data are open source, and made available at
https://github.com/ICL-ml4csec/VulBERTa.
II. RELATED WORK
This Section discusses related work on software vulnera-
bility detection using deep learning, and more in general on
pre-training models for representing programming languages.
A. Vulnerability detection using deep learning
Software vulnerability detection remains a challenging prob-
lem for security researchers across academia and industry.
Much work has been done to reliably and efﬁciently detect
security vulnerabilities in source code [19]–[21]. However,
recent advances in deep learning and its application across
different domains have induced security researchers to test the
effectiveness of deep learning on vulnerability detection tasks.
One of the earliest works that use deep learning techniques
to detect software vulnerabilities on raw source code is [18].
The unusual aspect of this work is that instead of using CNN
and RNN to train a classiﬁer model, they used it as a feature
extractor. The extracted features are then passed to a Random
Forest (RF) classiﬁer trained to detect software vulnerabilities.
This approach achieves an AUC score of 90.4% when tested
on real-world dataset.
Vuldeepecker [3] proposes a structure called code gadgets
that is based on the extraction of library/API function calls
from the source code. However, a limitation of this work is
that it only considers vulnerability that involves library/API
function calls. To overcome such limitations, the authors
extended their work and proposed SySeVR [4] as a systematic
framework for detecting vulnerabilities and can learn from
syntax and semantic of the source code. They updated the code
gadgets approach to accommodate both data and control de-
pendency information from the code. Following the success of
code gadgets in Vuldeepecker and SySeVR, muVuldeepecker
[5] was introduced to detect different types of vulnerabilities
through multi-class classiﬁcation task. In addition, this work
proposed a mechanism to pinpoint the location of a speciﬁc
vulnerability in the source code.
Independently from the work on code gadgets, other re-
search investigated graph-based approaches for vulnerability
detection. Devign [6] implemented a Graph Neural Network
(GNN) model to learn data and control dependency code
graphs and proposed a novel Conv module that extracts
interesting features from source code. DeepWukong [22]
embeds code fragments in a compact and low-dimensional
representation to detect ten different types of vulnerabilities
using GNN. Beyond C/C++, DeepTective [23] detects SQLi,
XSS and command injection vulnerabilites in PHP source
code by combining Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) and Graph
Convolutional Networks. Hybrid neural networks were also
explored in [24], where the authors constructed a Hybrid Deep
Learning Network to detect code injection attacks in HTML5-
based applications.
Another interesting line of research for deep learning-
based vulnerability detection focuses on dataset quality. RE-
VEAL [25] leverages the SMOTE re-sampling and dupli-
cate removal method to address the problem of imbalanced
datasets. D2A [26] proposes a curated benchmark dataset
based on a differential analysis approach, by analysing version
pairs of source code from multiple open-source projects.
B. Pre-trained models of source code
Pre-training is a technique used by the Transformer [8]
neural architecture, initially introduced in the Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) domain to learn deep representation
knowledge of textual data, for language-speciﬁc tasks such as
text translation, text completion and text generation [9]–[12].
To investigate and test the hypothesis of whether program-
ming languages can be understood using NLP techniques,
[17] presented C-BERT, a pre-training architecture that is
based on Abstract Syntax Trees (AST). The main idea behind
this is to learn AST-based features automatically from source
code during pre-training. In the ﬁne-tuning task, C-BERT
outperformed existing approaches across AST node tagging
and vulnerability detection tasks.
CodeBERT [27] implemented BERT [9], one of the earliest
pre-training architectures, on programming languages. The
authors pre-trained the model using bimodal and unimodal
data, consisting of code and natural language pairs from
different programming languages such as Java and Python.
CodeBERT achieved high BiLingual Evaluation Understudy
(BLEU) score as compared to RoBERTa [15] models.
DOBF [28] proposes a new pre-training objective that is
based on code deobfuscation. The deobfuscation objective
focuses on the structural aspect of programming language,
whether pre-training helps the model to learn syntactic and
structural information of the source code. Besides that, in
order to learn and investigate large graph-based representa-
tion, GraphCodeBERT [29] proposed a pre-trained model that
incorporates graph structure into the Transformer-based model
using graph-guided masked attention to ﬁlter irrelevant signals.
In the evaluation, GraphCodeBERT showed a strong perfor-
mance compared to other pre-trained models (RoBERTa and
CodeBERT) in different tasks such as code clone detection,
code translation, and code reﬁnement.
III. VULBERTA
In this section, we introduce VulBERTa, our pre-training
architecture for detecting vulnerabilities in C/C++ source code
at function-level granularity. The architecture is divided into
three key components: a tokenisation technique that parses
and tokenises code using a custom vocabulary; a pre-training
session that builds a representation model for code; and a
ﬁne-tuning session that reﬁnes the model to target a concrete
classiﬁcation task. Figure 1 visualises the 8 main steps of the
VulBERTa training pipeline.
A. Tokeniser
Our tokenisation pipeline aims at preserving syntactic struc-
ture and selected semantic identiﬁers. It consists of a parser,
a tokeniser and an encoder. These components stack onto
each other to transform raw source code into a structure
understandable by a neural network. Figure 2 visualises the
overall tokenisation pipeline of VulBERTa from raw code to
encoded output sequence. Below, we describe each step of the
pipeline.
1) Parser: We remove comments from the source code
of each function using several regular expressions. Then, we
parse the source code using Clang [14], a robust C/C++
parser that can parse code without including any libraries
or external dependencies. Clang allows us to preserve the
syntactic structure of the source code while breaking it down
into a sequence of code tokens.
2) Tokenisation: The tokens produced by the Clang parser
are further processed by the BPE algorithm, modiﬁed to take
into account our pre-deﬁned tokens, to further break the parsed
input down into ﬁne-grained tokens for encoding.
Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) is a subword tokenisation
algorithm proposed by [13] that replaces a similar pair of
consecutive bytes with a byte that does not appear in the data.
Subword tokenisation also reduces the possibility of encoun-
tering out-of-vocabulary tokens as most subword tokens are
available in the vocabulary. Following several implementations
of BPE, such as in [17], [27], we deﬁne a vocabulary size of
50000 as our maximum number of entries in the vocabulary.
Pre-deﬁned tokens are tokens we explicitly include in
the vocabulary, thus excluding them from the subword to-
kenisation process. Our goal is to preserve their syntactic or
semantic meaning. We have considered using token bucketing,
normalization and standard C/C++ tokens. We found that by
pre-deﬁning C/C++ keywords, punctuation, and standard API
names, we preserve more information about the meaning of
the source code during pre-training. Table I summarises our
pre-deﬁned tokens, which are excluded from BPE. The full list
consists of 451 pre-deﬁned tokens. The other tokens consist
of literals and identiﬁers, and are passed to BPE to undergo
the tokenisation process.
TABLE I
CUSTOM PRE-DEFINED TOKENS.
Token type
Total
Examples
BPE reserved tokens
5
<pad>, <unk>, <mask>
Standard C/C++ keyword tokens
104
int, if, void
Standard C/C++ punctuation tokens
54
=, ++, ->
Standard C/C++ API call tokens
288
strlen, scanf, memcpy
3) Encoder: Encoding is the process of converting the
code tokens into tensors. For pre-training, we have set the
maximum sequence length to 512 to maximise and generalise
the learning throughout the data, as the pre-training dataset
comprises different codebases. Meanwhile, we increase the
maximum sequence length to 1024 for the ﬁne-tuning task
so that it can contain, without truncation, more than 90% of
the actual samples on average. We pad shorter sequences to
the right, with a special padding token (<pad>).
B. Pre-training
Pre-training is the initial training session where we train a
standard RoBERTa [15] model with MLM objective in order
to learn an informative general representation of C/C++ code
across different software project. We will refer to the model
obtained from this pre-training session as the VulBERTa
model. Combining different software projects is beneﬁcial
to the learning process, as it generalises the representation
knowledge of the code even further across different coding
styles. This also helps to increase the robustness of the
model during pre-training. We set the embedding size to be
768 dimensions, following RoBERTa-base. This is the core
embedded knowledge of the model, that will be useful for
downstream ﬁne-tuning tasks.
C. Fine-tuning
In ﬁne-tuning, we further train the pre-trained model on
a speciﬁc downstream task, which in our case is software
vulnerability detection. Figure 3 shows our ﬁne-tuning pipeline
for vulnerability detection. We implement two different clas-
siﬁcation approaches for ﬁne-tuning. The ﬁrst approach is a
standard multilayer perceptron (MLP) on top of the pre-trained
model, and the second approach uses a Text Convolutional
Neural Network (TextCNN), which is cheaper and faster to
ﬁne tune due to the robustness of CNN architecture.
VulBERTa-MLP: We implement a fully-connected layer
with 768 neurons and one output layer 2 or 41 neurons based
on whether our ﬁne-tuning dataset is a binary or multi-class
classiﬁcation dataset. During ﬁne-tuning, we reuse the pre-
trained weights from VulBERTa and continue the training for
several epochs. This approach is the most common approach
for ﬁne-tuning pre-trained models as it takes advantage of the
whole VulBERTa architecture with little modiﬁcation [9], [15].
VulBERTa-CNN: We extract the embedding weights of the
pre-trained VulBERTa model and use them as the embedding
weights for a Hybrid TextCNN [30]. The TextCNN archi-
tecture consists of three 1-dimensional CNN, each with its
max-pooling layer. The outputs are concatenated and ﬂattened,


--- END OF 5.VulBERTa Deep Learning for Vulnerability Detection.pdf ---



--- START OF 4. Deep Learning based Vulnerability Detection.pdf ---

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. TBD, 2020
1
Deep Learning based Vulnerability Detection:
Are We There Yet?
Saikat Chakraborty, Rahul Krishna, Yangruibo Ding, Baishakhi Ray
Abstract—Automated detection of software vulnerabilities is a fundamental problem in software security. Existing program analysis
techniques either suffer from high false positives or false negatives. Recent progress in Deep Learning (DL) has resulted in a surge of
interest in applying DL for automated vulnerability detection. Several recent studies have demonstrated promising results achieving an
accuracy of up to 95% at detecting vulnerabilities. In this paper, we ask, “how well do the state-of-the-art DL-based techniques perform
in a real-world vulnerability prediction scenario?”. To our surprise, we ﬁnd that their performance drops by more than 50%. A
systematic investigation of what causes such precipitous performance drop reveals that existing DL-based vulnerability prediction
approaches suffer from challenges with the training data (e.g., data duplication, unrealistic distribution of vulnerable classes, etc.) and
with the model choices (e.g., simple token-based models). As a result, these approaches often do not learn features related to the
actual cause of the vulnerabilities. Instead, they learn unrelated artifacts from the dataset (e.g., speciﬁc variable/function names, etc.).
Leveraging these empirical ﬁndings, we demonstrate how a more principled approach to data collection and model design, based on
realistic settings of vulnerability prediction, can lead to better solutions. The resulting tools perform signiﬁcantly better than the studied
baseline—up to 33.57% boost in precision and 128.38% boost in recall compared to the best performing model in the literature.
Overall, this paper elucidates existing DL-based vulnerability prediction systems’ potential issues and draws a roadmap for future
DL-based vulnerability prediction research. In that spirit, we make available all the artifacts supporting our results: https://git.io/Jf6IA.
Index Terms—Software Vulnerability, Deep Learning, Graph Neural Network.
!
1
INTRODUCTION
Automated detection of security vulnerabilities is a funda-
mental problem in systems security. Traditional techniques
are known to suffer from high false-positive/false-negative
rates [1]–[5]. For example, static analysis-based tools typi-
cally result in high false positives, i.e., detect non-vulnerable
cases as vulnerable, and dynamic analysis suffers from high
false negatives, i.e., cannot detect many real vulnerabilities.
After prolonged effort, these tools remain unreliable, leaving
signiﬁcant manual overhead for developers [2].
Recent progress in Deep Learning (DL), especially in
domains like computer vision and natural language pro-
cessing, has sparked interest in using DL to detect security
vulnerabilities automatically with high accuracy. According
to Google scholar, 92 papers appeared in popular security
and software engineering venues between 2019 and 2020
that apply learning techniques to detect different types of
bugs1. In fact, several recent studies have demonstrated very
promising results achieving high accuracy (up to 95%) at
detecting vulnerabilities [6]–[12].
Given such remarkable reported success of DL models
at detecting vulnerabilities, it is natural to ask why they are
performing so well, what kind of features these models are
learning, and most importantly, whether they can be used
effectively and reliably in detecting real-world vulnerabili-
ties. Understanding such explainability and generalizability
•
Chakraborty, S., Krishna, R., Ding, Y., and Ray, B., are with Columbia
University, New York, NY, USA.
E-mail:
saikatc@cs.columbia.edu,
i.m.ralk@gmail.com,
yan-
gruibo.ding@columbia.edu, and rayb@cs.columbia.edu.
1. published in TSE, ICSE, FSE, ASE, S&P Oakland, CCS, USENIX
Security, etc.
of the DL models is pertinent as it may help solve similar
problems in other domains like computer vision [13], [14].
For instance, the generalizability of a DL model is
limited by implicit biases in the dataset, which are often
introduced during the dataset generation/curation/labeling
process and therefore affect both the testing and training
data equally (assuming that they are drawn from the same
dataset). These biases tend to allow DL models to achieve
high accuracy in the test data by learning highly idiosyn-
cratic features speciﬁc to that dataset instead of generaliz-
able features. For example, Yudkowsky et al. [15] described
an instance where US Army found out that a neural network
for detecting camouﬂaged tanks did not generalize well
due to dataset bias even though the model achieved very
high accuracy in the testing data. They found that all the
photos with the camouﬂaged tanks in the dataset were shot
in cloudy days, and the model simply learned to classify
lighter and darker images instead of detecting tanks.
In this paper, we systematically measure the generaliz-
ability of four state-of-the-art Deep Learning-based Vulner-
ability Prediction (hereafter DLVP) techniques [6]–[8], [12]
that have been reported to detect security vulnerabilities
with high accuracy (up to 95%) in the existing literature.
We primarily focus on the Deep Neural Network (DNN)
models that take source code as input [6]–[8], [12], [16] and
detect vulnerabilities at function granularity. These models
operate on a wide range of datasets that are either generated
synthetically or adapted from real-world code to ﬁt in
simpliﬁed vulnerability prediction settings.
First, we curate a new vulnerability dataset from two
large-scale popular real-world projects (Chromium and De-
bian) to evaluate the performance of existing techniques
in the real-world vulnerability prediction setting. The code
arXiv:2009.07235v1  [cs.SE]  3 Sep 2020
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. TBD, 2020
2
samples are annotated as vulnerable/non-vulnerable, lever-
aging their issue tracking systems. Since both the code and
annotations come from the real-world, detecting vulnerabil-
ities using such a dataset reﬂects a realistic vulnerability
prediction scenario. We also use FFMPeg+Qemu dataset
proposed by Zhou et al. [12].
To our surprise, we ﬁnd that none of the existing models
perform well in real-world settings. If we directly use a
pre-trained model to detect the real-world vulnerabilities,
the performance drops by ∼73%, on average. Even if we
retrain these models with real-world data, their perfor-
mance drops by ∼54% from the reported results. For ex-
ample, VulDeePecker [6] reported a precision of 86.9% in
their paper. However, when we use VulDeePecker’s pre-
trained model in real world datasets, its precision reduced to
11.12%, and after retraining, the precision becomes 17.68%.
A thorough investigation of such poor performance reveals
several problems:
• Inadequate Model. The most popular models are token-
based, which treat code as a sequence of tokens and do
not take into account semantic dependencies that play a
vital role in vulnerability predictions. Even when a graph-
based model is used, it does not focus on increasing the
class-separation between vulnerable and non-vulnerable
categories. Thus, in realistic scenarios, they suffer from low
precision and recall.
• Learning Irrelevant Features. While looking at the features
that the existing techniques are picking up (using state-of-
the-art explanation techniques [17], [18]), we ﬁnd that the
state-of-the-art models are essentially picking up irrelevant
features that are not related to vulnerabilities and are likely
artifacts of the training datasets.
• Data Duplication. The training and testing data in most
existing approaches contain duplicates (up to 68%); thus,
artiﬁcially inﬂating the reported results.
• Data Imbalance. Existing approaches do not alleviate the
class imbalance problem [19], [20] of real-world vulnera-
bility distribution as non-vulnerable code is much more
frequent than the vulnerable ones.
Having established these concerns empirically, we propose a
road-map that we hope will help the DL-based vulnerability
prediction researchers to avoid such pitfalls in the future. To
this end, we demonstrate how a more principled approach
to data collection and model design, based on our empirical
ﬁndings, can lead to better solutions. For data collection, we
discuss how to curate real-world vulnerability prediction
data incorporating both static and evolutionary (i.e., bug-ﬁx)
nature of the vulnerabilities. For model building, we show
representation learning [21] can be used on top of traditional
DL methods to increase the class separation between vul-
nerable and non-vulnerable samples. Representation learn-
ing is a popular class of machine learning techniques that
automatically discovers the input representations needed
for improving classiﬁcation, and thus, replaces the need for
manual feature engineering. Our key insight is as follows:
distinguishing features of vulnerable and benign code is
complex; thus, the model must learn to represent them
automatically in the feature space.
We further empirically establish that using semantic in-
formation (with graph-based models), data de-duplication,
and balancing training data to address the class imbalance
of vulnerable/non-vulnerable samples can signiﬁcantly im-
prove vulnerability prediction. Following these steps, we
can boost precision and recall of the best performing model
in the literature by up to 33.57% and 128.38% respectively
over current baselines.
In summary, our contributions in this paper are:
1) We systematically study existing approaches in DLVP
task and identify several problems with the current
dataset and modeling practices.
2) Leveraging the empirical results, we propose a sum-
mary of best practices that can help future DLVP re-
search and experimentally validate these suggestions.
3) We curated a real-world dataset from developer/user
reported vulnerabilities of Chromium and Debian
projects. We release our dataset in this anonymous
directory https://bit.ly/3bX30ai.
4) We also open source all our code and data we used
in this study for broader dissemination. Our code and
replication data are available in https://git.io/Jf6IA.
To this end, we argue that DL-based vulnerability detection
is still very much an open problem and requires a well-
thought-out data collection and model design framework
guided by real-word vulnerability detection settings.
2
BACKGROUND AND CHALLENGES
DLVP methods aim to detect unknown vulnerabilities in
target software by learning different vulnerability patterns
from a training dataset. Most popular DLVP approaches
consist of three steps: data collection, model building, and
evaluation. First, data is collected for training, and an ap-
propriate model is chosen as per design goal and resource
constraints. The training data is preprocessed according to
the format preferred by the chosen model. Then the model
is trained to minimize a loss function. The trained model
is intended to be used in the real world. To assess the
effectiveness of the model performance of the model is
evaluated on unseen test examples.
This section describes the theory of DL-based vulnerabil-
ity prediction approaches (§2.1), existing datasets (§2.2), ex-
isting modeling techniques (§2.3), and evaluation procedure
(§2.4). Therein, we discuss the challenges that potentially
limit the applicability of existing DLVP techniques.
2.1
DLVP Theory
DL-based vulnerability predictors learn the vulnerable code
patterns from a training data (Dtrain) set where code ele-
ments are labeled as vulnerable or non-vulnerable. Given
a code element (x) and corresponding vulnerable/non-
vulnerable label (y), the goal of the model is to learn features
that maximize the probability p(y|x) with respect to the
model parameters (θ). Formally, training a model is learning
the optimal parameter settings (θ∗) such that,
θ∗= argmaxθ
Y
(x,y)∈Dtrain
p(y|x, θ)
(1)
First, a code element (xi) is transformed to a real valued
vector (hi ∈Rn), which is a compact representation of xi.
How a model transforms xi to hi depends on the speciﬁcs of
the model. This hi is transformed to a scalar ˆy ∈[0, 1] which
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, VOL. TBD, 2020
3
denotes the probability of code element xi being vulnerable.
In general, this transformation and probability calculation is
achieved through a feed forward layer and a softmax [22]
layer in the model. Typically, for binary classiﬁcation task
like vulnerability prediction, optimal model parameters are
learned by minimizing the cross-entropy loss [23]. Cross-
entropy loss penalizes the discrepancy in the model’s pre-
dicted probability and the actual probability (0. for non-
vulnerable 1. for vulnerable examples) [24].
Synthetic
Semi
Synthetic
Real
(Balanced)
Pattern
Based
Static
Analyzer
Developer
Provided
Realistic nature of Code
Source of  Annotation
SATE IV
Juliet 
SARD,
NVD
FFMpeg
+Qemu
Draper
REVEAL
Dataset
Real
(Imbalanced)
FFMpeg+
Qemu
Figure 1: Different DLVP dataset and their synthetic/realistic
nature. From red to green, colors symbolize increasing realistic
nature of dataset. Red is the most synthetic, green is the most
realistic.
2.2
Existing Dataset
To train a vulnerability prediction model, we need a set
of annotated code with labels vulnerable or benign. The
number of vulnerable code should be large enough to allow
the model to learn from it. Researchers used a wide spec-
trum of data sources to collect data for DLVP (see Figure 1).
Depending on how the code samples are collected and how
they are annotated, we classify them as:
• Synthetic data: The vulnerable code example and the an-
notations are artiﬁcially created. SATE IV Juliet [25] dataset
and SARD [26] fall in this category. Here the examples
are synthesized using known vulnerable patterns. These
datasets were originally designed for evaluating traditional
static and dynamic analysis based vulnerability prediction
tools.
• Semi-synthetic data: Here either the code or the annotation
is derived artiﬁcially. For example, Draper dataset, proposed
by Russell et al. [8], contains functions that are collected
from open source repositories but are annotated using static
analyzers. Examples of SARD [26] and National Vulnera-
bility Database (NVD
[27]) dataset are also taken from
production code; however, they are often modiﬁed in a way
to demonstrate the vulnerability isolating them from their
original context. Although these datasets are more complex
than synthetic ones, they do not fully capture the complex-
ities of the real-world vulnerabilities due to simpliﬁcations
and isolations.
• Real data: Here both the code and the corresponding vul-
nerability annotations are derived from real-world sources.
For instance, Zhou et al. [12] curated Devign dataset, which
consists of past vulnerabilities and their ﬁxes from four
open-source projects, two of which are publicly available.
1
void action(char *data) const {
2
// FLAW: Increment of pointer in the loop will cause
3
// freeing of memory not at the start of the buffer.
4
for (; *data != ’\0’; data++){
5
if (*data == SEARCH_CHAR){
6
printLine("We have a match!");
7
break;
8
}
9
}
10
free(data);
11
}
Figure 2: Example Vulnerability (CWE761) [28].
1
static void eap_request(
2
eap_state *esp, u_char *inp, int id, int len) {
3
...
4
if (vallen < 8 || vallen > len) {
5
...
6
break;
7
}
8
/* FLAW: ’rhostname’ array is vulnerable to overflow.*/
9
-
if (vallen >= len + sizeof (rhostname)){
10
+
if (len - vallen >= (int)sizeof (rhostname)){
11
ppp_dbglog(...);
12
MEMCPY(rhostname, inp + vallen,
sizeof(rhostname) - 1);
13
rhostname[sizeof(rhostname) - 1] = ’\0’;
14
...
15
}
16
...
17
}
Figure 3: CVE-2020-8597 - A partial patch (original patch [29])
for an instance of buffer overﬂow vulnerability in linux point to
point protocol daemon (pppd) due to a logic ﬂaw in the packet
processor [30], [31].
Limitations. The problems with the dataset lie in how
realistic the data source is and how they are annotated
(see Figure 1). A model trained on a synthetic dataset
comprising of simple patterns will be limited to detecting
only those simple pattern which seldom occur in real life.
For instance, consider an atypical buffer overﬂow example
in Figure 2 used by VulDeePecker and SySeVR. Albeit a
good pedagogical example, real world vulnerabilities are
not as simple or as isolated. Figure 3 shows another buffer
overﬂow example from linux kernel. Though the ﬁx is very
simple, ﬁnding the vulnerability itself requires an in-depth
reasoning about the semantics of different components (i.e.,
variables, functions etc.) of the code. A model is trained to
reason about simpler examples as in Figure 2 will fail to
reason about Figure 3 code. Further, any model annotated
by a static analyzer [8] inherits all the drawbacks, e.g.,, high
false positive rate [1], [2]. In the most realistic dataset, FFM-
Peg+Qemu [12], the ratio of vulnerable and non-vulnerable
examples is approximately 45%-55%, which does not reﬂect
the real world distribution of vulnerable code. Further,
the dataset only contains function that annotates functions
that went through vulnerability-ﬁx commits as vulnerable.
When a model is trained on such dataset, the model is not
presented with other functions from a vulnerable functions’
context, thus will not be as effective in differentiating vul-
nerable functions from other non-vulnerable functions from
the context.


--- END OF 4. Deep Learning based Vulnerability Detection.pdf ---



--- START OF 6.Transformer-Based Vulnerability Detection in Code at the Line Level.pdf ---

#
Name
Age
Gender
    Booking Status
    Current Status
1. SANJO SAM
  23
    M
  CNF/S7/72/SIDE UPPER
  CNF /S7/72/SIDE UPPER
Transaction ID: 100006248108741
IR recovers only 57% of cost of travel on an average.
Payment Details
₹ 455.00
₹ 17.70
₹ 11.80
₹ 0.45
₹ 484.95
PG Charges as applicable (Additional)
Invoice Number:
PS25844207385411
Address:
Indian Railways New Delhi
Supplier Information:
SAC Code:
996421
GSTIN:
07AAAGM0289C1ZL
Recipient Information:
GSTIN:
NA
Electronic Reservation Slip (ERS)-Normal User
Booked From
To
BELAGAVI (BGM)
BELAGAVI (BGM)
KSR BENGALURU (SBC)
Start Date* 19-Dec-2025
Departure* 18:30 19-Dec-2025
Arrival* 06:20 20-Dec-2025
PNR
Train No./Name
Class
8442073854
16590 / RANI CHENNAMMA
SLEEPER CLASS (SL)
Quota
Distance
Booking Date
TATKAL (TQ)
611 KM
18-Dec-2025 11:05:38 HRS
Passenger Details
Acronyms:
RLWL: REMOTE LOCATION WAITLIST
PQWL: POOLED QUOTA WAITLIST
RSWL: ROAD-SIDE WAITLIST
Beware of fraudulent customer care number. For any assistance, use only the IRCTC e-ticketing Customer care number:14646.
IRCTC Convenience Fee is charged per e-ticket irrespective of number of passengers on the ticket.
* The printed Departure and Arrival Times are liable to change. Please Check correct departure, arrival from Railway Station Enquiry
or Dial 139 or SMS RAIL to 139.
This ticket is booked on a personal User ID, its sale/purchase is an offence u/s 143 of the Railways Act,1989.
Prescribed original ID proof is required while travelling along with SMS/ VRM/ ERS otherwise will be treated as without ticket and
penalized as per Railway Rules.
Menu Rates on Mail/Express Trains
Breakfast (Veg):
₹ 40.00
Standard Meal (Veg):
₹ 80.00
Breakfast (Non-Veg): ₹ 50.00
Standard Meal (Non-Veg: With Egg Curry):
₹ 90.00
Rail Neer (1 Litre):
₹ 14.00
Standard Meal (Non-Veg: With Chicken Curry):
₹ 130.00
For Catering menu information on all trains, please visit https://menurates.irctc.co.in.
Indian Railways GST Details:
Ticket Fare
IRCTC Convenience Fee (Incl. of GST)
eWallet Transaction Charge
Travel Insurance Premium (Incl. of GST)
Total Fare (all inclusive)
Name:
NA
Address:
Taxable Value:
455
CGST Rate:
2.5%
CGST Amount:
0.0
SGST/UGST Rate:
SGST/UGST Amount:
IGST Rate:
5.0%
IGST Amount:
0.0
Total Tax:
Place of Supply:   NA    State Name/Code of Supplier:   Delhi/DL
INSTRUCTIONS:
1.
Prescribed Original ID proofs are:- Voter Identity Card / Passport / PAN Card / Driving License / Photo ID card issued by Central / State Govt. / Public
Sector Undertakings of State / Central Government ,District Administrations , Municipal bodies and Panchayat Administrations which are having serial
number / Student Identity Card with photograph issued by recognized School or College for their students / Nationalized Bank Passbook with photograph
/Credit Cards issued by Banks with laminated photograph/Unique Identification Card "Aadhaar", m-Aadhaar, e-Aadhaar. /Passenger showing the
Aadhaar/Driving Licence from the "Issued Document" section by logging into his/her DigiLocker account considered as valid proof of identity. (Documents
uploaded by the user i.e. the document in "Uploaded Document" section will not be considered as a valid proof of identity).
2.
PNRs having fully waitlisted status will be dropped and automatic refund of the ticket amount after deducting the applicable CLERKAGE by Railway shall
be credited to the account used for payment for booking of the ticket. Passengers having fully waitlisted e-ticket are not allowed to board the train.
However, the names of PARTIALLY waitlisted/confirmed and RAC ticket passenger will appear in the chart.
3.
A clerkage charge of Rs.60 per passenger plus GST for AC Classes and Rs.60 per passenger for Non AC classes will be deducted if the ticket remains
Waitlisted at the time of Cancellation/Charting.
4.
Passengers travelling on a fully waitlisted e-ticket will be treated as Ticketless.
5.
Obtain certificate from the TTE /Conductor in case of (a) PARTIALLY waitlisted e-ticket when LESS NO. OF PASSENGERS travel, (b)A.C FAILURE, (c)TRAVEL IN
LOWER CLASS. This original certificate must be sent to GGM (IT), IRCTC, Internet Ticketing Centre, 2nd Floor, Tower-D, World Trade Centre, Nauroji Nagar,
New Delhi- 110029, after filing TDR online within prescribed time for claiming refund.
6.
In case, on a party e-ticket or a family e-ticket issued for travel of more than one passenger, some passengers have confirmed reservation and others are
on RAC or waiting list, full refund of fare, less clerkage, shall be admissible for confirmed passengers also subject to the condition that the ticket shall be
cancelled online or online TDR shall be filed for all the passengers upto thirty minutes before the scheduled departure of the train.
7.
In case train is late more than 3 hours, refund is admissible as per railway refund rules only when TDR is filed by the user before the actual departure of
the train at boarding station and passenger has not travelled.
8.
In case of train cancellation on its entire run, full refund is granted automatically by the system. However, if the train is cancelled partially on its run or
diverted and not touching boarding/destination station, passengers are required to file online TDR within 72 hours of scheduled departure of the train
from passengers boarding station.
9.
Never purchase e-ticket from unauthorized agents or persons using their personal IDs for commercial purposes. Such tickets are liable to be cancelled and
forfeited without any refund of money, under section (143) of the Indian Railway Act 1989. List of authorized agents are available on www.irctc.co.in
under 'Find NGet Agents' option.
10. For detail, Rules, Refund rules, Terms & Conditions of E-Ticketing services, Travel Insurance facility etc. Please visit www.irctc.co.in
11. While booking this ticket, you have agreed of having read the Health Protocol of Destination State of your travel. You are again advised to clearly read the
Health Protocol advisory of destination state before start of your travel and follow them properly.
12. The FIR forms are available with on board ticket checking staff, train guard and train escorting RPF/GRP staff.
13. Variety of meals available in more than 1500 trains. For delivery of meal of your choice on your seat log on to www.ecatering.irctc.co.in or call 1323 Toll
Free. For any suggestions/complaints related to Catering services, contact Toll Free No. 1800-111-321 (07.00 hrs to 22.00 hrs)
14. National Consumer Helpline (NCH) Toll Free Number: 1800-11-400 or 14404
15. You can book unreserved ticket from UTS APP or ATVMs (Automatic Ticket Vending Machines) located in Railway Stations.
16. As per RBI guidelines, the refund of Ticket should be given in the same Bank account, which was used for booking. It is necessary that the Bank Account
used for booking online ticket should not be closed at least up to 30 days beyond the date of the journey. If accounts are found closed at the time of
processing refund, the refund will be regretted by the Bank.
Customer Care:
For e-ticket booking ,cancellation and refund assistance , Please contact us at 14646 / 08044647999 /08035734999 or raise query at
https://equery.irctc.co.in
Just dial 139 from your landline, mobile & CDMA phones for railway enquiries as well as for giving suggestions/filing complaints on Rail
Madad.
Customer Support (Outside India): 📞 Call: +91-8044647999 / +91-8035734999
For Railway Enquiries as well as for giving suggestions/filing complaints on Rail Madad please contact us at:139 or SMS: RAIL to 139
For e-catering, to book and get food delivered on your train berth, please contact us at 1323 (24*7 Hrs Toll Free) or log on to
www.ecatering.irctc.co.in.
Print ERS Without Advertisements [X]


--- END OF 6.Transformer-Based Vulnerability Detection in Code at the Line Level.pdf ---



--- START OF 7. data Quality for software vulnerability datasets.pdf ---

Data Quality for Software Vulnerability Datasets
Roland Croft∗†, M. Ali Babar∗†, M. Mehdi Kholoosi∗†
∗School of Computer Science, CREST, University of Adelaide, Australia, {ﬁrstname.lastname}@adelaide.edu.au
† Cyber Security Cooperative Research Centre, Australia
Abstract—The use of learning-based techniques to achieve
automated software vulnerability detection has been of long-
standing interest within the software security domain. These
data-driven solutions are enabled by large software vulnerability
datasets used for training and benchmarking. However, we
observe that the quality of the data powering these solutions
is currently ill-considered, hindering the reliability and value of
produced outcomes. Whilst awareness of software vulnerability
data preparation challenges is growing, there has been little
investigation into the potential negative impacts of software
vulnerability data quality. For instance, we lack conﬁrmation that
vulnerability labels are correct or consistent. Our study seeks
to address such shortcomings by inspecting ﬁve inherent data
quality attributes for four state-of-the-art software vulnerability
datasets and the subsequent impacts that issues can have on
software vulnerability prediction models. Surprisingly, we found
that all the analyzed datasets exhibit some data quality problems.
In particular, we found 20-71% of vulnerability labels to be
inaccurate in real-world datasets, and 17-99% of data points were
duplicated. We observed that these issues could cause signiﬁcant
impacts on downstream models, either preventing effective model
training or inﬂating benchmark performance. We advocate for
the need to overcome such challenges. Our ﬁndings will enable
better consideration and assessment of software vulnerability
data quality in the future.
Index Terms—software vulnerability, data quality, machine
learning
I. INTRODUCTION
Software vulnerability detection is a vital task for achieving
secure software systems [1]. However, traditional techniques
for detecting vulnerabilities (e.g., rule-based methods) struggle
in terms of scalability and false positive rates [2]. Hence,
many researchers have been motivated to leverage the technical
advancements of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and Machine
Learning (ML) to support automatic software vulnerability
detection [3]. Recent studies have reported great success in this
direction [4]–[8], with performance that surpasses traditional
approaches [9]. We refer to these learning-based techniques as
Software Vulnerability Prediction (SVP). Like any data-driven
task, SVP is highly data-dependent. In order to learn complex
features of vulnerabilities, we require large code datasets that
have been labelled as either vulnerable or non-vulnerable.
Nonetheless, software vulnerability data collection is not a
trivial task [10]. Labelled examples of software vulnerabilities
are difﬁcult to obtain in the real-world, as they are scarce
[11], poorly documented [12], and limited to reported vulner-
abilities [13]. Consequently, many researchers have conducted
labourious work constructing large-scale software vulnera-
bility datasets [14]–[17]. However, we found that relatively
little counterpart work has been conducted to understand
the software vulnerability data quality. Whilst data quantity
is important, an effective machine learning system requires
adequate data quality [18]. Despite the increasing realisation of
software vulnerability data preparation challenges [10], there
has been relatively little effort made to provide a systematic
understanding of how these challenges can potentially impact
data quality, and subsequently affect the reliability of down-
stream software vulnerability analysis.
A lack of understanding of data quality leads to critical
barriers to advance software assurance against vulnerabilities.
Data quality is an integral component of any data-driven
system: garbage in, garbage out [19]. Certain data biases or
misinformation can make benchmark performance results mis-
leading [20]–[22]. This can cause models to fail to generalise
to real-world scenarios [17], [23], [24], if they have not been
trained with fair and realistic data.
Thus, we set out to understand the nature of data quality for
software vulnerability datasets. To achieve this, we focused
on inherent data quality attributes that are intrinsic to the
data itself. Table I presents the ﬁve data quality attributes that
we systematically analyse: accuracy, uniqueness, consistency,
completeness, and currentness. For each attribute, we provide
a measurement of its prevalence in existing datasets and
analysis into the causes of observed issues. Our ﬁndings
revealed that even state-of-the-art datasets exhibit considerable
data quality challenges. As expected, we found these issues
to cause signiﬁcant negative impacts on both training and
benchmarking of state-of-the-art SVP models. Our ﬁndings
have substantial implications:
• Data quality issues may constrain the patterns able to be
learnt by SVP models. We found that real-world datasets
can face substantial issues for label correctness of the
vulnerable class. Approximately 20-71% of vulnerability
labels were inaccurate. Furthermore, up to 47% of labels
were inconsistent. These issues cause models to learn
false or insufﬁcient patterns.
• Software vulnerability benchmark datasets may lead to
inﬂated performance. A few datasets exhibited large data
duplication rates, between 17-99%. Hence, data leakage
causes models to report inﬂated performance using stan-
dard test setups. Evaluation performance decreased by up
to 82% after removing such duplicates.
To achieve the most reliable results from learning-based
software vulnerability analytics, we must consider and address
the issue of data quality. Whilst some of the observed quality
issues can be solved easily through rule-based detection and
arXiv:2301.05456v1  [cs.SE]  13 Jan 2023
TABLE I
INHERENT DATA QUALITY ATTRIBUTES DEFINED BY ISO/IEC 25012 [25].
Attribute
Deﬁnition
Interpretation
Accuracy
The degree to which the data has attributes that correctly represent the true value of the intended attribute of a
concept or event.
Correct labelling.
Uniqueness
The degree to which there is no duplication in records.
No duplicate values.
Consistency
The degree to which data has attributes that are free from contradiction and are coherent with other data.
Consistent labelling.
Completeness
The degree to which subject data associated with an entity has values for all expected attributes and related instances.
No missing values.
Currentness
The degree to which data has attributes that are of the right age.
Not obsolete data.
removal, others cannot be remediated in this manner. As a
community, we must focus on developing knowledge and tools
for constructing high quality software vulnerability datasets.
Our contributions are twofold:
1) We provide understanding of the nature and causes of
observed data quality issues in software vulnerability
datasets. We also demonstrate the corresponding impact
of these issues for software vulnerability prediction. Such
investigation highlights the problem of data quality and
the need to mitigate these challenges. Furthermore, our
insights help overcome data quality issues, for which we
have provided directions in the discussion.
2) We propose and conduct methods for measurement of
data quality for software vulnerability datasets. These
efforts can enable practitioners to consider and perform
data quality assessment. We have provided a reproduction
package of this study to assist with such efforts [26].
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
A. Software Vulnerability Data Preparation
Software Vulnerability Prediction (SVP) models use pro-
gram analysis techniques to learn software vulnerability pat-
terns automatically from historical examples [27], [28]. Due to
the unstructured nature of source code, researchers have found
the most success using Deep Learning (DL) techniques that
learn from program syntax and semantics [3], [7], [8], [24].
Hence, SVP is a data-hungry process [16]: the models
require a large training dataset of annotated code modules,
labelled as vulnerable or non-vulnerable. However, acquiring
a reliable vulnerability label source is a non-trivial task; there
is no oracle that can unfailingly prove the existence or absence
of vulnerabilities from a codebase [29]. Thus, researchers have
relied on a variety of label sources to account for different
shortcomings. Following prior analysis [10], [24], we outline
four main label categories:
• Security Vendor Provided. Security vendors maintain
vulnerability databases that aggregate information from
various advisories. This provides a standardised collec-
tion of disclosed vulnerabilities. Examples include the
National Vulnerability Database (NVD) [30], or the Snyk
Vulnerability Database [31]. Vulnerability records often
provide links to patches, which can then be traced to
identify real-world source code and vulnerabilities.
• Developer Provided. Vulnerability databases may not
properly document all vulnerabilities of a project [32].
Hence, researchers may collect vulnerability ﬁxing com-
mits directly from developers via the development history
or via a project’s issue tracking systems. However, this
method requires additional effort to search development
artefacts for security-related defects.
• Tool Created. Developer or security vendor-provided la-
bels have a major limitation of only collecting reported
vulnerabilities, which severely limits the number of ex-
amples that can be collected. In reality, vulnerabilities can
remain latent or undetected [33], which limits the dataset
size and adds considerable label noise to the modules.
To circumvent this, some researchers have utilised static
security analysis tools to automatically produce labels
for the source code [16], [34], [35]. This process relies
heavily on the accuracy of the static analyser used, which
is a source of contention [15].
• Synthetically Created. Finally, to bypass the limitations
of other label sources, vulnerable code examples and
annotations can be created artiﬁcially from known vul-
nerable patterns. Synthetically producing entries ensures
label correctness at the cost of source code diversity [24].
Despite these caveats, researchers have faced data prepa-
ration challenges regardless of the selected dataset [10].
Whilst state-of-the-art SVP models report good performance
on benchmark datasets, performance only measures the ability
of a model to ﬁt a particular dataset. A good performance
value does not guarantee that a model will generalise to
real-world scenarios [36]. Hence, data quality issues will
hinder the reliability and trustworthiness of the outcomes. For
instance, previous studies [13], [33] have highlighted inﬂated
performance due to inaccurate labelling mechanisms for non-
vulnerable modules. Consequently, the industry value and
adoption of SVP models is uncertain [37], [38]. Our study
seeks to shed light on the state of software vulnerability data
quality so that we better understand the reliability and trust-
worthiness of the reported outcomes that use these datasets.
B. Data Quality in Software Engineering Research
Training data is an integral component of ML systems that
heavily inﬂuences the produced models. Unlike conventional
software systems, ML systems exhibit both system and data
requirements [18]. As a result, data quality is becoming
an essential component of AI-based Software Engineering
research [39]. Software engineering data and artefacts are
often noisy as they are usually collected post-hoc via mining
software repositories [40]. The data and labels are not gener-
ated explicitly for the purposes of research. Hence, software
engineering data has been found to exhibit issues with data
accuracy, relevance, and provenance [40].
Existing studies that investigate data quality characteristics
of software engineering datasets are currently non-systematic
and limited. Data quality can be deﬁned by a large range of
dimensions, like those deﬁned in Table I. Existing studies often
limit their analysis to semantic or syntactic data accuracy and
noise [22], [41]–[45]. Similarly, Jimenez et al. [33] considered
label accuracy within software vulnerability datasets. However,
this approach fails to provide a complete picture. To make
informed data decisions, there is a need for a systematised
and objective investigation of data quality in the software
engineering domain. Croft et al. [10] conducted a systematic
literature review of the data quality issues considered by SVP
researchers. Whilst this work provides a systematised view,
the observations are unsubstantiated with respect to actual
software vulnerability datasets and SVP models. Our work
purports to perform quantitative analysis of data quality within
software vulnerability datasets and explicitly show its impacts
on SVP models.
Additionally, researchers have recently begun constructing
automated cleaning frameworks to reduce the observed data
noise issues and ensure correctness [22], [45]. These frame-
works are grounded in a deep understanding of the data quality
issues afﬂicting the relevant datasets. We expect the ﬁndings
obtained in our study to enable the creation of a cleaning
framework for software vulnerability datasets.
III. STUDY DESIGN
To understand the data quality of the state-of-the-art soft-
ware vulnerability datasets, we address two Research Ques-
tions (RQs) through the analysis of several data quality
attributes. Figure 1 displays the overall workﬂow used to
conduct this study. We describe each of the three processes
in Sections III-B, III-C and III-D, respectively.
A. Research Questions
Our investigation is guided by the following RQs:
Processes
Data Quality
frameworks
Artefacts
SVP Models
SV Datasets
Rationale
RQ1
Measure Attributes
Analysis
RQ2
Validate Attribute
Impact
Impact
Identify Data Quality
Attributes
Fig. 1. The overall study design.
• RQ1: What data quality issues are present in the state-
of-the-art software vulnerability datasets? We ﬁrstly
aim to inform practitioners of the state and nature of data
quality for software vulnerability datasets.
• RQ2: To what extent do data quality issues impact
downstream software vulnerability prediction models?
Our second aim is to verify the importance of data qual-
ity. We attempt to demonstrate the potentially negative
impact that observed data quality issues can have on the
downstream tasks for software vulnerability prediction.
B. Identifying Data Quality Attributes
The lack of existing data quality consideration for software
vulnerability datasets has perhaps been caused by the lack of
systematic deﬁnitions for data quality and hence measurement.
It is not easy to deﬁne data quality, due to its many dimensions
[46]. Not all dimensions may be relevant to a speciﬁc scenario
[47], and different organisations would value quality attributes
differently [18]. For instance, not all organisations would
prioritise data conﬁdentiality. There are two main categories
of data quality attributes [25]: inherent data quality, which
intrinsically relates to the data itself, or system-dependent
data quality, which extrinsically arises from external fac-
tors and requirements. For this study, we focused on purely
inherent data quality attributes, as SVP models have not
yet achieved widespread industrial application [37]. System-
dependent attributes cannot be properly measured without
an associated deployment context. In this sense, we focused
on the data rather than how the data is used. Hence, our
ﬁndings are not constrained to particular modelling techniques
or features.
To identify inherent data quality attributes, we used the
standardised data quality framework ISO/IEC 25012 [25].
This framework has been used for data quality assessment
in both the Software Engineering [47] and Machine Learning
[18], [48] domains. ISO/IEC 25012 outlines ﬁve inherent data
quality attributes: Accuracy, Consistency, Completeness, Cur-
rentness, and Credibility. We excluded the credibility attribute
as it is difﬁcult to quantify in existing software vulnerability
datasets. Credibility indicates the level of trust that we have
in a dataset; the authenticity of the data source or supplier. We
need to ensure that our data points are free from contamination
or fake information [36]. As datasets have been produced by
peer-reviewed research or respected government organisations
[10], we assume a level of trust in the data source and supplier
of each dataset. Additionally, we considered a uniqueness
data dimension, due to its prevalence in existing software
engineering research [49], and its importance as highlighted
by previous SVP researchers [24]. Table I summarises the
selected inherent data quality attributes for analysis.
C. Measuring Attributes
For the analysis, we collected one dataset of each label
source described in Section II-A. To ensure the collected
datasets represented the state-of-the-art appropriately, we con-
sidered datasets that were created or used by a conference or


--- END OF 7. data Quality for software vulnerability datasets.pdf ---



--- START OF 9.A Large-Scale Empirical Study on Vulnerability Detection with Deep Learning.pdf ---

An Empirical Study of Deep Learning Models
for Vulnerability Detection
Benjamin Steenhoek
Iowa State University
Ames, Iowa, USA
benjis@iastate.edu
Md Mahbubur Rahman
Iowa State University
Ames, Iowa, USA
mdrahman@iastate.edu
Richard Jiles
Iowa State University
Ames, Iowa, USA
rdjiles@iastate.edu
Wei Le
Iowa State University
Ames, Iowa, USA
weile@iastate.edu
Abstract—Deep learning (DL) models of code have recently
reported great progress for vulnerability detection. In some
cases, DL-based models have outperformed static analysis tools.
Although many great models have been proposed, we do not
yet have a good understanding of these models. This limits
the further advancement of model robustness, debugging, and
deployment for the vulnerability detection. In this paper, we
surveyed and reproduced 9 state-of-the-art (SOTA) deep learn-
ing models on 2 widely used vulnerability detection datasets:
Devign and MSR. We investigated 6 research questions in
three areas, namely model capabilities, training data, and model
interpretation. We experimentally demonstrated the variability
between different runs of a model and the low agreement among
different models’ outputs. We investigated models trained for
speciﬁc types of vulnerabilities compared to a model that is
trained on all the vulnerabilities at once. We explored the
types of programs DL may consider “hard” to handle. We
investigated the relations of training data sizes and training
data composition with model performance. Finally, we studied
model interpretations and analyzed important features that the
models used to make predictions. We believe that our ﬁndings
can help better understand model results, provide guidance on
preparing training data, and improve the robustness of the
models. All of our datasets, code, and results are available at
https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.ﬁgshare.20791240.
Index Terms—deep learning, vulnerability detection, empirical
study
I. INTRODUCTION
Deep learning vulnerability detection tools have achieved
promising results in recent years. The state-of-the-art (SOTA)
models reported 0.9 F1 score [15], [35] and outperformed
static analyzers [6], [12]. The results are exciting in that deep
learning may bring in transformative changes for software
assurance. Thus, industry companies such as IBM, Google
and Amazon are very interested and have invested heavily to
develop such tools and datasets [19], [27], [30], [46].
Although promising, deep learning vulnerability detection
has not yet reached the level of computer vision and natural
language processing. Most of our research focuses on trying
a new emerging deep learning model and making it work for
a dataset like the Devign or MSR dataset [13], [27], [47].
However, we know little about the model itself, e.g., what
type of programs the model can/cannot handle well, whether
we should build models for each vulnerability type or we
should build one model for all vulnerability types, what is
a good training dataset, and what information the model has
used to make the decisions. Knowing the answers to these
questions can help us better develop, debug, and apply the
models in practice. But considering the black-box nature of
deep learning, these questions are very hard to answer. This
paper does not mean to provide a complete solution for these
questions but is an exploration towards these goals.
In this paper, we surveyed and reproduced a collection
of SOTA deep learning vulnerability detection models, and
constructed research questions and studies to understand these
models, with the goal of distilling lessons and guidelines for
better designing and debugging future models. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst paper that systematically
investigated and compared a variety of SOTA deep learning
models. In the past, Chakraborty et al. [7] have explored four
existing models such as VulDeePecker [24], SySeVR [23] and
Devign [47] and pointed out that the models trained with
synthetic data reported low accuracies on real-world test set,
and the models used spurious features like variable names to
make the predictions.
We constructed our research questions and classiﬁed them
into three areas, namely model capabilities, training data,
and model interpretation. Speciﬁcally, our ﬁrst goal is to
understand the capabilities of deep learning for handling
vulnerability detection problems, especially regarding the fol-
lowing research questions:
• RQ1 Do models agree on the vulnerability detection
results? What are the variabilities across different runs
of a model and across different models?
• RQ2 Are certain types of vulnerabilities easier to detect?
Should we build models for each type of vulnerabilities
or should we build one model that can detect all the
vulnerabilities?
• RQ3 Are programs with certain code features harder to
be predicted correctly by current models, and if so, what
are those code features?
Our second study focuses on training data. We aim to
understand whether and how the training data size and project
composition can affect the model performance. Speciﬁcally,
we constructed the following research questions:
• RQ4 Can increasing the dataset size help improve the
model performance for vulnerability detection?
arXiv:2212.08109v3  [cs.SE]  12 Feb 2023
• RQ5 How does the project composition in the training
dataset affect the performance of the models?
Finally, our third investigation area is model intepretation.
We used SOTA model explanation tools to investigate:
• RQ6 What source code information the models used
for prediction? Do the models agree on the important
features?
To answer the research questions, we surveyed the SOTA
deep learning models and successfully reproduced 11 models
on their original datasets (see Section II). These models used
different deep learning architectures such as GNN, RNN,
LSTM, CNN, and Transformers. To compare the models,
we managed to make 9 models work with the Devign and
MSR, two popular datasets. We selected the two datasets
because (1) both of the datasets contain real-world projects and
vulnerabilities; (2) the majority of models are evaluated and
tuned with the Devign dataset in their papers; and (3) the MSR
dataset contains 310 projects and its data have annotations on
vulnerability types, which are needed to study our RQs. We
discovered the ﬁndings for our 6 RQs with carefully designed
experiments (Section III) and considerations of the threats
(Section IV). In summary, our research contributions include:
1) We conducted a comprehensive survey for the deep
learning vulnerability detection models.
2) We delivered a reproduction package, consisting of the
trained models and datasets for 11 SOTA deep learning
frameworks with various study settings;
3) We designed 6 RQs to understand model capabilities,
training data and model interpretation;
4) We constructed the studies and experimentally obtained
the results for the RQs; and
5) We prepared interesting examples and data for further
studying model interpretability.
II. A SURVEY OF MODELS AND THEIR REPRODUCTION
To collect the SOTA deep learning models, we studied
the papers from 2018 to 2022 and also used Microsoft’s
CodeXGLUE leaderboard 1 and IBM’s Defect detection D2A
leaderboard 2. We worked with all the open-source models
we can ﬁnd, and successfully reproduced 11 models. The
complete list of models and the reasons we failed to reproduce
some models are given in our data replication package.
As shown in Table I, the reproduced models cover a variety
of deep learning architectures. Devign [47] and ReVeal [7]
used GNN on property graphs [47] that integrate control
ﬂow, data dependencies and AST. ReGVD [31] used GNN
on tokens. Code2Vec used multilayer perceptron (MLP) on
AST. VulDeeLocator [22] and SySeVR [23] are based the se-
quence models of RNN and Bi-LSTMs. Recent deep learning
detection used pre-trained transformers, including CodeBERT
[14], VulBERTa-CNN [16], VulBERTa-MLP, PLBART [2] and
LineVul [15]
1https://microsoft.github.io/CodeXGLUE
2https://ibm.github.io/D2A
TABLE I: 11 Reproduced Models
Model
Year
Architecture
Dataset
Devign [47]
2019
GNN,
property graph
Devign
ReVeal [7]
2021
GNN,
property graph
Devign, ReVeal
ReGVD [31]
2022
GNN, token
Devign
CodeBERT [14]
2020
Transformer
Devign
VulBERTa-CNN [16]
2021
Transformer, CNN
VulDeePecker,
Draper, ReVeal
µVulDeePecker,
Devign, D2A
VulBERTa-MLP [16]
2021
Transformer, MLP
PLBART [2]
2021
Transformer
Devign
LineVul [15]
2022
Transformer
MSR
Code2Vec [3]
2021
MLP, AST
Devign
SeSyVR [23]
2018
RNN
SARD, NVD
VulDeeLocator [22]
2020
Bi-LSTM
SARD, NVD
For our RQs, we used the Devign [47] and MSR [13]
datasets. We studied the datasets used in these 11 models
in their original papers, shown under Dataset in Table I. We
found that the Devign dataset has been evaluated and tuned
in 8 out of 11 models. It is a balanced dataset consisting of
roughly the same number of vulnerable and non-vulnerable
examples, a total of 27,318 data points (each example is
also called an data point). LineVul worked with the MSR
dataset, which is a more recently available dataset. It is an
imbalanced dataset, consisting of 10,900 vulnerable examples
and 177,736 non-vulnerable examples. These examples are
labeled with their source projects and their Common Weakness
Enumeration entries (CWE), which indicates the types of the
vulnerabilities. We leverage such traits of the datasets for some
of our RQs.
We reproduced the results for the models using their original
datasets and settings, shown in Table II. The columns of A,
P, R and F represents the commonly used metrics in deep
learning vulnerability detection, including accuracy, precision,
recall and F1. Our reproduction results are able to compute
within 2% difference compared with the original papers in
general. The exceptions are ReVeal, for which the authors
conﬁrmed that our results ﬁxed a data leakage error in the
original paper, and Devign, for which we used the third-party3
reproduction released by Chakaborthy et al [7], as the original
Devign code is not open-sourced.
To enable the comparisons of the models, we improved the
models’ implementations to support both Devign and MSR
datasets. When running experiments for the RQs, we excluded
VulDeeLocator and SeSyVR as they cannot be easily modiﬁed
for the Devign and MSR datasets. As a result, we used the
rest 9 models for our studies of the RQs.
III. RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND FINDINGS
We organized the research questions into three areas,
namely model capabilities, training data, and model interpre-
3https://github.com/saikat107/Devign
TABLE II: Model reproduction on their original datasets.
Reproduction results are reported as the mean of 3 random
seeds. ’-’ indicates that the results for a metric were not
reported in their papers. The numbers are in percentage.
Model
Paper Results
Our Reproduction
A
P
R
F
A’
P’
R’
F’
Devign
59
54
63
57
56
50
71
59
ReVeal
63
57
75
64
53
48
71
56
ReGVD
63
-
-
-
62
62
46
52
CodeBERT
62
-
-
-
64
59
54
55
VulBERTa-CNN
64
-
-
-
64
60
59
59
VulBERTa-MLP
65
-
-
-
63
60
58
59
PLBART
63
-
-
-
62
58
59
59
LineVul
-
97
86
91
99
96
88
92
Code2Vec
62
-
-
-
59
55
58
57
SeSyVR
98
90
92
90
94
88
84
86
VulDeeLocator
99
98
-
97
98
99
96
98
tation. See Sections III-A to III-C respectively. For each RQ,
we present the motivation, study setup and our ﬁndings.
A. Capabilities of Deep Learning Models
RQ1 Do models agree on the vulnerability detection results?
What are the variabilities across different runs of a model and
across different models?
Motivation: It is known that deep learning model performance
can vary across training runs when using different random
seeds. In this RQ, we aim to measure for vulnerability detec-
tion, how much such variability actually exists. Additionally,
we want to discover how much agreement exists across differ-
ent deep learning models and across the models with similar
architectures. We hope our ﬁndings can inform developers and
researchers of the uncertainty which potentially exists behind
the numbers reported by such tools.
Study Setup: We trained the models using 3 different random
seeds on the same train/valid/test partitions of the Devign
dataset. We used this dataset because almost all the models
tuned their hyperparameters on it. We measured the percentage
of stable inputs—-an input that has the same binary label for
all 3 random seeds. We then compared the stable inputs across
the models to measure their agreement.
Findings: In Table III, we reported the percentage of stable
inputs for the entire dataset, under stable-all, and for the test
dataset, under stable-test. We also reported the variations of
the F1 score across 3 seeds (on test dataset) under stdev-test-
F1.
Our results show that on average 34.9% test data (30.6%
total data) reported different predictions dependent on the
seeds used in training. The GNN models that work on property
graph ranked the top 2 variability; especially for ReVeal,
for 50% of the test data, its outputs changed between runs.
Code2Vec reported the least variability compared to the GNN
and transformer models. Interestingly, we found that unstable
inputs are associated with more incorrect predictions—-stable
inputs had a total of 19% incorrect predictions across all seeds
and unstable had 47%.
Although many examples reported different predictions be-
tween runs, we found that F1 test scores did not change
as much, and had a standard deviation of 2.9 on average.
That said, for most models, we expect 95% of performance
measurements to be within a range of 5.8% above or below the
mean performance when measured on multiple random seeds.
TABLE III: Variability over 3 random seeds on Devign dataset
Model
stable-all
stable-test
stdev-test-F1
ReVeal
55%
50%
2.73
Devign
57%
55%
2.24
VulBERTa-MLP
60%
58%
3.13
PLBART
72%
67%
1.03
LineVul
72%
67%
3.46
CodeBERT
72%
69%
2.78
VulBERTa-CNN
74%
71%
2.60
ReGVD
74%
72%
7.33
Code2Vec
89%
77%
0.78
Table IV shows that the deep learning models learned
diverse classiﬁers in that only 7% of the test data (and 7%
total data) are agreed by all the models. The 3 GNN models
agreed on 20% of test examples (and 25% total), whereas
the 3 top performing transformers (LineVul, PLBART, and
VulBERTa-CNN) agreed on 34% test data (and 44% total).
But when we compared all 5 transformer models, only 22% of
test examples (and 29% total) are agreed. The low agreement
among different models implies that when there are no ground
truth labels, a differential testing approach that compares
across models as an oracle may have limited uses.
TABLE IV: Agreement across different models
Model
agreed-all
agreed-test
All 9 models
7%
7%
All 3 GNN models
25%
20%
Top 3 transformer models
44%
34%
All 5 transformer models
29%
22%
RQ2 Are certain types of vulnerabilities easier to detect?
Should we build models for each type of vulnerabilities or
should we build one model that can detect all vulnerabilities?
Motivation: In traditional software assurance techniques such
as program analysis, we use different algorithms to detect
different vulnerabilities. Certain types, e.g., inﬁnite loops, are
more difﬁcult to detect than other types, e.g., memory leaks,
because one requires to track symbolic values and reasoning
about the loops, and the other only needs to check if the
memory free is invoked after its allocation. In this RQ, we
are interested to learn whether for deep learning vulnerability
detectors, it is also true that certain types of vulnerabilities are
easier to detect than the others. Considering different types of


--- END OF 9.A Large-Scale Empirical Study on Vulnerability Detection with Deep Learning.pdf ---



--- START OF 10.Explainable Vulnerability Detection with Graph Neural Networks.pdf ---

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Information and Software Technology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/infsof
Graph-based explainable vulnerability prediction
Hong Quy Nguyen a,∗, Thong Hoang b, Hoa Khanh Dam a, Aditya Ghose a
a University of Wollongong, 2 Northfields Avenue, Keiraville, 2500, NSW, Australia
b CSIRO Data61, Level 5/13 Garden St, Eveleigh, 2015, NSW, Australia
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Keywords:
Graph neural network
Explanation
Vulnerability
A B S T R A C T
Significant increases in cyberattacks worldwide have threatened the security of organizations, businesses, and
individuals. Cyberattacks exploit vulnerabilities in software systems. Recent work has leveraged powerful
and complex models, such as deep neural networks, to improve the predictive performance of vulnerability
detection models. However, these models are often regarded as ‘‘black box’’ models, making it challenging
for software practitioners to understand and interpret their predictions. This lack of explainability has
resulted in a reluctance to adopt or deploy these vulnerability prediction models in industry applications.
This paper proposes a novel approach, Genetic Algorithm-based Vulnerability Prediction Explainer, (herein
GAVulExplainer), which generates explanations for vulnerability prediction models based on graph neural
networks. GAVulExplainer leverages genetic algorithms to construct a subgraph explanation that represents
the crucial factor contributing to the vulnerability. Experimental results show that our proposed approach
outperforms baselines in providing concrete reasons for a vulnerability prediction.
1. Introduction
Cyberattacks pose a significant threat to businesses, governments,
and individuals. In recent years, there has been a sharp increase in
cyberattacks. Cyberattacks are malicious and deliberate attempts by
an individual or organization to exploit a software vulnerability – a
security flaw, glitch, bug, or weakness found in software systems. [1].
For instance, the infamous WannaCry1 ransomware attack exploited a
vulnerability in Microsoft Windows systems. The Heartbleed vulner-
ability2 – the heartbeat extension in OpenSSL does not validate the
input request and returns the exact length from input, which leads to
sending any of the information available in the server’s memory buffer
– has made millions of websites and online platforms vulnerable to
cyberattacks [2]. There have been a massive number of attack-prone
vulnerabilities reported in recent years. As of August 2022, there are
183,390 (and counting) publicly disclosed cybersecurity vulnerabilities
registered in the Common Vulnerability Enumeration (CVE)3 list. As the
size and complexity of software systems increase, discovering software
vulnerabilities has become very difficult and costly as they are often
hidden deeply in the code. Finding the Heartbleed vulnerability in
a million lines of OpenSSL code is like ‘‘searching for a needle in
a haystack’’ [3]. Hence, there has been a strong need for predictive
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: nguyen.hquy@gmail.com (H.Q. Nguyen), james.hoang@data61.csiro.au (T. Hoang), hoa@uow.edu.au (H.K. Dam), aditya@uow.edu.au
(A. Ghose).
1 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WannaCry_ransomware_attack
2 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heartbleed
3 www.cve.org
models and tools that help increase the likelihood of finding vul-
nerabilities and reduce the time required by software engineers to
discover vulnerabilities. Thus, predicting software vulnerabilities has
recently attracted significant attention. A popular approach to building
vulnerability prediction models is to leverage machine learning tech-
niques. Features or predictors are derived from software code and fed
into machine learning classifiers. Substantial research [4–9] has gone
into carefully crafting features that can discriminate vulnerable code
from secure code, such as code size, complexity, and churn metrics.
However, those features do not truly reflect the syntax and semantics
of code and do not generalize well. Hence, recent approaches have
focused on preserving code structure information to represent source
code [10–15]. These approaches leverage deep learning (DL) tech-
niques to offer an end-to-end solution and automatically learn features
for predicting vulnerabilities in software code. Specifically, [16–19]
employ deep graph neural networks to effectively study the flows and
dependencies in software code for vulnerability prediction. The use of
powerful and complex DL models can greatly enhance vulnerability
detection. However, a major drawback of these models is that they
are often viewed as ‘‘black boxes’’, making it difficult for software
engineers to understand the reasoning behind the results and verify
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2024.107566
Received 16 April 2023; Received in revised form 23 August 2024; Accepted 24 August 2024
Information and Software Technology 177 (2025) 107566 
Available online 31 August 2024 
0950-5849/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc/4.0/ ). 
H.Q. Nguyen et al.
their accuracy. This lack of transparency can lead to low adoption rates.
While creating interpretable DL models is challenging, it is possible to
develop post-hoc models that can distill the outcomes of vulnerability
detection and pinpoint vulnerable regions in code. This allows software
practitioners to understand the model’s outcome and increase their
confidence in the results, thus reducing mistrust and increasing the
adoption rate of using DL models in daily operations [20]. In this
paper, we propose GAVulExplainer, an approach that aims to increase
the transparency of a graph-based vulnerability detection model by
providing explanations for its predictions. This explanation step is in-
tegrated into an arbitrary graph-based vulnerability detection pipeline.
GAVulExplainer, a post-hoc model, takes as input both the graph
representation of vulnerable code and the graph neural network (GNN)-
based vulnerability prediction model that was trained on the graph
representation. Our graph-based explanation method employs genetic
algorithms [21] to generate a subgraph that illustrates the vulnerable
information in the code. Unlike previous graph-based explanation tech-
niques, GAVulExplainer avoids getting stuck in a local optimum during
training or consuming excessive computational resources by efficiently
searching for accurate substructure information within the given graph.
Additionally, GAVulExplainer allows software engineers to manually
adjust the size of the explanation subgraph while preserving the same
detection results as the original graph. The main contributions of our
paper are as follows:
1. We propose a model-agnostic approach to generate explanations.
Our approach separates vulnerability prediction from explana-
tion, and thus it is not tied to any specific graph-based vulnera-
bility prediction model.
2. We formulate explanation generation as a search problem, i.e.,
finding a compact subgraph of a given graph representation
explaining the vulnerability in a given code. We propose a novel
approach, namely GAVulExplainer, that leverages genetic algo-
rithms to generate explanations. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first time that genetic algorithms have been employed
in this context.
3. An empirical evaluation demonstrates that our approach out-
performs existing approaches, such as SubGraphX and GNNEx-
plainer, in terms of fidelity, i.e., generating explanations that
capture the actual reasons for a possible vulnerable code pre-
dicted by vulnerability prediction models.
The structure of the paper is as follows. In the next section, we provide
a motivating example. Section 3 provides a brief background on the
problem formulation and graph neural networks in the context of
vulnerability prediction. We then present our approach in Section 4 and
report a detailed analysis of the results, and present some examples to
understand the scenarios in Section 5. We discuss the threats to validity
in Section 6. In Section 7, we discuss related work before summarizing
and outlining future work in Section 8.
2. Motivating example
Fig. 1 shows a real example of a vulnerability in source code.4
The example shows that the increment of a pointer in the loop may
cause a buffer overflow in the code. Specifically, if the pointer ∗
does not start at the start of the buffer data it would cause a free
memory problem (or a memory leak5) when the code is executed.
One way to fix this vulnerability is to use a loop variable to prevent
the buffer overflow. For example, lines 4 and 5 can be replaced by
for(i=0;i<strlen(data);i++) and if(data[i]==SEARCH_
CHAR) respectively. A critical point here is that the code token *data
on line 4 should be changed to strlen(data) to eliminate the
vulnerability.
4 www.github.com/CGCL-codes/VulDeePecker/blob/master/CWE-
399/source_files/112611/CWE761
5 www.javatpoint.com/memory-leak-in-java
Fig. 1. An example of the vulnerable code (CWE761 [13]).
Fig. 2. The Program Dependence Graph of the vulnerable code (CWE761).
Fig. 2 presents the Program Dependence Graph (PDG) [22] for the
code in our example. The PDG is a technique to construct the graph
from the source code. The PDG attempts to simultaneously control
dependency, and data dependency. Blue edges and red edges indicate
control dependencies and data dependencies respectively. The code
token *data, causing the buffer overflow, is represented as node #0.
Deep learning-based vulnerability prediction has been extensively
studied in the last decade [13,15,23–25]. The common theme in those
approaches is to construct DL models by learning from the patterns
of vulnerable code in the past, and using this knowledge to predict
vulnerabilities in the new code. However, these DL models have a
limited ability to explain why the code is vulnerable compared to
program-based analysis. Specifically, DL models can only predict if a
piece of code is vulnerable, but do not provide an explanation for such
a prediction. This leads to developers’ unwillingness to employ those
models in their daily practice of developing software applications.
In a recent study [18], GNNExplainer
[26] was used to provide
explanations for each vulnerable function. The explanations generated
by GNNExplainer are presented as clustered subgraphs. However, this
study primarily concentrates on vulnerability detection using PDG-
based graph representation; therefore, the explanation aspect is not
comprehensively evaluated. Furthermore, there are no evaluation met-
rics employed to gauge the effectiveness of an explanation, making it
challenging to determine the reliability of the explanations generated
by their approach. For example, Fig. 3 shows a subgraph, extracted by
adopting the approach proposed in [18] to explain the vulnerability
prediction of the example code in Fig. 1. The nodes and the edges
Information and Software Technology 177 (2025) 107566 
2 
H.Q. Nguyen et al.
Fig. 3. The subgraph of the vulnerable code (CWE761) extracted by using [18]. The
nodes and the edges of the sub-graph are represented by the yellow nodes and the
bold edges, respectively.
of the subgraph are represented by the yellow nodes and the bold
edges, respectively. Node 0 indicates the buffer overflow vulnerability
and should be in the subgraph. However, the subgraph generated by
following the approach proposed in [18] does not contain this critical
node. Hence, using the current approach, the explanation may miss
the true reasons for explaining why a vulnerability is predicted in this
example.
Given these limitations, we introduce a graph-based explainable
vulnerability detection method that aims to provide a clear explanation
from any graph-based detection model. Our approach utilizes genetic
algorithms to generate a subgraph as an explanation for inputted
vulnerable code. Additionally, our method is user-friendly for software
developers, as it allows them to set the size of the explanation in
advance. To further support software practitioners in evaluating the
effectiveness of the generated explanations, we also incorporate evalua-
tion metrics to compare performance between state-of-the-art explainer
approaches. This makes it easier for them to decide which one to
integrate into their practice.
3. Background
In this section, we first present the problem formulation. We then
describe some background knowledge on graph neural networks.
3.1. Problem formulation
A source code at the function level represents one of the lowest
levels of granularity for vulnerability prediction. At this level, we can
utilize code analysis tools such as Joern [27] to capture and analyze the
overall flow and structure of vulnerabilities within the code [17,28,29].
Each function of the given code is defined as a graph 𝐺= (𝑉, 𝐸), where
𝑉is a set of nodes or vertices representing the statements and 𝐸is a
set of edges representing control dependencies or data dependencies
between various nodes. Each node 𝑣∈𝑉is represented by a set of
features denoted by the symbol 𝑓𝑣. The features describe the properties
of the node, such as variable names, function names, or data types. An
adjacency matrix 𝐴, where each edge 𝑎𝑖,𝑗∈𝐴represents the connection
between 𝑣𝑖and 𝑣𝑗in the graph. For example, Fig. 2 shows an example
of the graph of the vulnerable code at the function level. The graph
contains eight nodes and a list of edges. Each node is represented
by a list of features, while each edge indicates the flow of control
dependencies or data dependencies. Specifically, node #6 in Fig. 2
contains two code tokens, such as char (data type) and data (variable
name), which are considered the features of this node. The connection
from node #6 to node #0 is presented as 𝑎6,0 = 1, 𝑎6,0 ∈𝐴.
Given a dataset of input–output pairs = (𝐺, 𝑦) ∈× , where
𝑦= {0, 1} is the binary classification label (𝑦= 1 indicates that the
given code function 𝐺is vulnerable), a graph-based vulnerability model
is developed, 𝛷∶→that maps these inputs to outputs. When
a prediction model is fixed, a post-hoc graph-based explanation model,
denoted by 𝛷takes the graph 𝐺and 𝛷as input and produces the sub-
graph 𝐺𝑆∈𝐺that explains the prediction made by the vulnerability
prediction model 𝛷∶(, 𝛷) →𝐺𝑆.
3.2. Background on graph-based vulnerability prediction
A graph consists of nodes and edges and is flexible enough to
model any kind of data structure across various domains, such as
social science [30], finance [31], chemicals [32], and industrial appli-
cations [33]. Graphs are also commonly employed to represent a source
code to capture its structure information [27,34–36]. Inspired by the
rise of deep learning, graph neural networks have rapidly evolved in the
past decade to solve complex problems related to graph data [37–39].
Previous works show that a code function can be represented as a graph
by leveraging its structure [18,40–43]. Specifically, the code’s structure
is often represented in various forms, such as an Abstract Syntax Tree
(AST) [44], a Program Dependency Graph [22], or a Code Property
Graph (CPG) [27]. The AST provides the general syntactic structure
of the source code. The PDG only captures the control dependencies
and data dependencies in the source code. CPG, on the other hand, can
simultaneously encode syntax structure, control, and data dependence.
To predict whether a given code contains vulnerabilities, researchers
take the graph representation of the given code as input to graph neural
network models, which output a binary classification [18,40–43]. The
classifier determines whether these graphs are vulnerable.
3.3. Graph neural networks
A Graph Neural Network (GNN) [37,38,45] often includes multiple
layers of stacking. The multiple layers consist of the input layer, the
hidden layers, and the output layer. While the first layer consumes
input data, the last layer yields prediction results regarding the input
data. The hidden layers, which may contain a single layer or many
layers, take the output from the first layer and then send it to the
next layer. Fig. 4 depicts an overview of a simple GNN, which includes
two consecutive neural message passing layers and a multilayer feed-
forward network, for the graph classification problem, such as the
graph vulnerability prediction.
The GNN takes a graph 𝐺, as input and outputs the prediction label
of the given code. The graph is put through a ‘‘neural message passing’’
mechanism to train the vulnerability prediction model. Let 𝑣and 𝑓𝑣
represent a node and its code tokens (or features) in the graph, respec-
tively; each code token is then defined as a vector by a word embedding
vector model [46,47], denoted by . These vector representations are
combined to present the node’s vector representation as follows:
𝑥𝑣=
∑
𝑙∈
(𝑓(𝑙)
𝑣)
(1)
where 𝑥𝑣indicates the vector representation of the node 𝑣and 
represents the node’s code tokens in the 𝐺. All nodes are padded or
truncated to the same length ||. For example, node #6 in Fig. 2
contains two tokens, such as char and data, which are first converted
to two vector representations. These vectors are then combined to
construct the vector representation of node #6. We then continue this
process until we collect all the nodes’ vector representations.
During the training process, the GNN model iteratively updates the
vector representation of node 𝑣by aggregating the vector representa-
tions of its neighbors by employing two functions, such as UPDATE and
AGGREGATION (AGG) [38,39,48]. After 𝑡iterations of aggregation,
the vector representation of node 𝑣is defined as follows:
𝑥𝑡
𝑣= UPDATE (𝑥𝑡−1
𝑣
, AGG({𝑥𝑡−1
𝑛
, ∀𝑛∈(𝑣)}))
(2)
where 𝑥𝑡
𝑣is the vector representation of node 𝑣at the 𝑡th iteration. (𝑣)
is a set of nodes adjacent to 𝑣. For example, node #0 in Fig. 2 has two
neighbors, such as node #6 and node #1.
The choice of UPDATE and AGG functions is left to the develop-
ers [38,39,48]. For example, GINCov [48] proposed to use a multilayer
perceptron (MLP) to update the vector representation of node 𝑣, and a
Information and Software Technology 177 (2025) 107566 
3 


--- END OF 10.Explainable Vulnerability Detection with Graph Neural Networks.pdf ---



--- START OF 11. Cross-Project_Transfer_Representation_Learning_for_Vulnerable_Function_Discovery.pdf ---

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 14, NO. 7, JULY 2018
3289
Cross-Project Transfer Representation Learning
for Vulnerable Function Discovery
Guanjun Lin
, Jun Zhang
, Member, IEEE, Wei Luo, Lei Pan
, Member, IEEE,
Yang Xiang
, Senior Member, IEEE, Olivier De Vel, and Paul Montague
Abstract—Machine learning is now widely used to detect
security vulnerabilities in the software, even before the soft-
ware is released. But its potential is often severely compro-
mised at the early stage of a software project when we face
a shortage of high-quality training data and have to rely on
overly generic hand-crafted features. This paper addresses
this cold-start problem of machine learning, by learning
rich features that generalize across similar projects. To
reach an optimal balance between feature-richness and
generalizability, we devise a data-driven method including
the following innovative ideas. First, the code semantics are
revealed through serialized abstract syntax trees (ASTs),
with tokens encoded by Continuous Bag-of-Words neural
embeddings. Next, the serialized ASTs are fed to a sequen-
tial deep learning classiﬁer (Bi-LSTM) to obtain a represen-
tation indicative of software vulnerability. Finally, the neural
representation obtained from existing software projects is
then transferred to the new project to enable early vulner-
ability detection even with a small set of training labels.
To validate this vulnerability detection approach, we manu-
ally labeled 457 vulnerable functions and collected 30 000+
nonvulnerable functions from six open-source projects.
The empirical results conﬁrmed that the trained model is
capable of generating representations that are indicative
of program vulnerability and is adaptable across multi-
ple projects. Compared with the traditional code metrics,
our transfer-learned representations are more effective for
predicting vulnerable functions, both within a project and
across multiple projects.
Index
Terms—Abstract
syntax
tree,
cross-project,
representation learning, transfer learning, vulnerability
discovery.
Manuscript received March 21, 2018; accepted March 26, 2018. Date
of publication April 2, 2018; date of current version July 2, 2018. Paper
no. TII-18-0714. (Corresponding author: Jun Zhang.)
G. Lin, W. Luo, L. Pan are with the School of Information Technology,
Deakin University, Geelong, VIC 3216, Australia (e-mail: lingu@deakin.
edu.au; wei.luo@deakin.edu.au; l.pan@deakin.edu.au).
J. Zhang is with the School of Software and Electrical Engineering,
Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, VIC 3122, Australia
(e-mail: junzhang@swin.edu.au).
Y. Xiang is with the Digital Research & Innovation Capability Platform,
Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, VIC 3122, Australia
(e-mail: yxiang@swin.edu.au).
O. De Vel and P. Montague are with the Defence Science &
Technology Group, Department of Defence, Maribyrnong, VIC 3032,
Australia (e-mail: Olivier.DeVel@dst.defence.gov.au; Paul.Montague@
dst.defence.gov.au).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TII.2018.2821768
I. INTRODUCTION
V
ULNERABILITIES in software critically undermine the
security of computer systems and threaten the IT infras-
tructure of many government sectors and organizations. For
instance, the recently disclosed “Heartbleed” and “Shellshock”
vulnerabilities, and a vulnerability in the server message block
(SMB) protocol exploited by the WannaCry ransomware have
affected a wide range of systems and millions of users world-
wide. According to [4] and [26], one of the major causes of se-
curity incidents and breaches can be attributed to the exploitable
vulnerabilities in software. Once a vulnerability is exploited by
attackers, companies and organizations may suffer from sig-
niﬁcant ﬁnancial loss as well as irreparable damage to their
reputation [22].
The early detection of vulnerabilities in applications is vi-
tal for implementing cost-effective attack-mitigation solutions.
From the perspective of code execution, techniques for iden-
tifying vulnerabilities can be categorized into static, dynamic,
and hybrid approaches. Static techniques, such as rule-based
analysis [6], code similarity detection i.e., code clone detection
[8], [9], and symbolic execution [2], mainly rely on the analysis
of source code, but often struggle to reveal bugs and vulner-
abilities occurring at the runtime. Dynamic analysis includes
fuzzing test [23] and taint analysis [17], and focuses on detect-
ing vulnerabilities manifested during program execution, but in
general, has low-code coverage. The hybrid approaches combin-
ing static and dynamic analysis techniques aim to overcome the
aforementioned weaknesses. However, all of these approaches
rely on a limited set of known syntactic or behavioral patterns
of vulnerabilities, and such deﬁciency raises the challenge of
detecting the previously unseen vulnerabilities.
Data-driven vulnerability discovery using machine learn-
ing (ML) provides a new opportunity for intelligent, effec-
tive, and efﬁcient vulnerability detection. The existing ML-
based approaches primarily operate on source code, which
offers better human readability. Researchers have applied
source-code based features, such as imports (i.e., header ﬁles),
function calls [16], software complexity metrics, and code
changes [22], as indicators for identifying potentially vulner-
able ﬁles or code fragments. Moreover, features and informa-
tion obtained from version control systems, such as developer
activities [12] and code commits [20], were also adopted for pre-
dicting vulnerabilities. Most recently, two studies: 1) VUDDY
[9]; and 2) VulPecker [10], focused on detecting vulnerable
1551-3203 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on December 01,2025 at 12:37:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
3290
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 14, NO. 7, JULY 2018
Fig. 1.
Proposed framework for vulnerability discovery. It contains three stages: The ﬁrst stage is to pretrain a bidirectional long short-term memory
(Bi-LSTM) network using source code projects; the second stage is to feed the trained network with the target project to obtain representations as
features; the last stage is to train an ML classiﬁer with the learned features.
functions and code fragments based on code clone/similarity
analysis, nevertheless, both approaches incur high false negative
rate.
However, most of the existing ML-based approaches focus
on software component- or ﬁle-level vulnerability detection,
which rely on the manual effort and expertise of the code au-
ditor to inspect the code base to accurately pinpoint the exact
location of the vulnerabilities. Because of the relative scarcity
of vulnerabilities, there is insufﬁcient historical vulnerability
data for training and validating a statistical model, especially
on inactive open-source projects. In this paper, we aim to ex-
plore a ﬁne-grained vulnerability detection approach targeting
multiple software projects. To overcome the challenges, we pro-
pose a framework that solves this problem in three stages (see
Fig. 1). First, we create vulnerability ground truth data at the
function-level. Second, we extract features from the abstract
syntax trees (ASTs) of each function. Speciﬁcally, we use a
parser to obtain ASTs in a serialized form by using depth-
ﬁrst traversal (DFT). Then, we convert the serialized ASTs to
equal-length sequences while preserving the structural and se-
mantic features. To further reﬁne these features, we apply a long
short-term memory (LSTM) [7] recurrent neural network with
Word2vec [13] embeddings for learning a higher level of repre-
sentations. We hypothesize that the algorithm has the capacity of
automatically extracting deep vulnerable programming features
that contain richer information than the shallow features driven
by domain knowledge. We also hypothesize that the learned
low-level representations are transferable and are independent
of software projects using the same programming language.
Last, given a target project with insufﬁcient labeled data, we ap-
ply the same feature-extraction process and feed the data to the
pretrained network for learning a subset of representations. Sub-
sequently, the learned representations are used to train a classi-
ﬁer for vulnerability prediction. The empirical study shows that
the features extracted using our method are signiﬁcantly more
effective than software code metrics (CMs) in detecting vulner-
abilities. Despite the small number of instances labeled in the
projects, our algorithm is capable of effectively utilizing avail-
able data from other projects for pretraining a basic network,
which can then be used for extracting deep AST representa-
tions for the projects with insufﬁcient data. Empirical results
demonstrate the effectiveness of learned representations which
contribute to better detection accuracy than using traditional
CMs.
In summary, our contributions are three-fold.
1) We propose a framework for function-level vulnerability
discovery, which offers a ﬁne-grained detection capabil-
ity, facilitating a quick location of vulnerabilities.
2) We develop an approach to extract the sequential fea-
tures of ASTs that capture the structural and semantic
information of functions. Such information reﬂects the
vulnerable programming patterns.
3) We construct a Bi-LSTM network for effectively extract-
ing deep AST representations, which supports the trans-
ferability across software projects. The empirical studies
show that the deep AST representations provide the pre-
cise identiﬁcation of vulnerable functions (80% precision
is achieved when retrieving the 10 most probable vulner-
able functions).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
presents how features are extracted from ASTs derived from
source code functions. Section III describes how to leverage
LSTM for obtaining the sequential patterns in ASTs for vul-
nerability detection. Then, Section IV evaluates the detection
performance of the proposed approach using two sets of exper-
iments for the evaluation of the effectiveness of our deep AST
representations and transfer-representation learning. Section VI
concludes this paper.
II. FUNCTION LEVEL AST ENGINEERING
We believe that software vulnerabilities are often reﬂected
in the syntactical structure of source code, particularly at the
function-level. To capture such features and code properties, we
follow the early work of Yamaguchi et al. [25]. The authors
assumed that vulnerable programming patterns are associated
with many vulnerabilities, and these patterns can be revealed
by analyzing the program’s ASTs. An AST is a syntactical
structure of source code (for instance, a function), depicting the
relationships among the components of the code in a hierarchical
tree view, and faithfully representing the function-level control
ﬂow [see Fig. 2(a) and (b)]. Compared with the control ﬂow
graphs (CFGs), ASTs provide a natural program representation
at the function level and reserve more information of the source
code, while CFGs usually do not include variable declarations.
Therefore, in this paper, we choose ASTs for extracting the
latent programming patterns. To achieve this, an AST needs
to be serialized for converting to a vector while preserving its
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on December 01,2025 at 12:37:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LIN et al.: CROSS-PROJECT TRANSFER REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR VULNERABLE FUNCTION DISCOVERY
3291
Fig. 2.
Motivating examples of how function foo is converted to an AST
in serialized format. (a) Two examples of C functions. (b) An AST of
function foo, with placeholder nodes (thick line), API nodes (dashed line)
and syntax node (dotted line) [25]. (c) A serialized AST of function foo.
structure and semantics. The vector that holds the structural and
semantic information can then be leveraged by our proposed
Bi-LSTM network for obtaining deep representations capable
of distinguishing vulnerable functions from nonvulnerable ones.
A. Robust AST Parsing
Prior to extracting features from ASTs, we have to obtain
the ASTs from the source code. ASTs are usually generated by
a compiler during the code parsing stage. However, without a
working build environment, obtaining ASTs from C/C++ code
is nontrivial. With “CodeSensor,” which is a robust parser im-
plemented by [25] based on the concept of island grammars
[15], we can extract ASTs from individual source ﬁles or even
from fragments of function code without the presence of de-
pendent libraries. By feeding CodeSensor with the source code
ﬁles, the parsed ASTs can be generated in a serialized format,
ready for subsequent processing.
In Fig. 2(c), a serialized AST is organized to ﬁt in a table,
presenting a more user-friendly view than the original tree view.
The ﬁrst column is the type of all the nodes; the second column
records the depth/layer of each type; and the last two columns
present the actual names and values of the types in the original
function, respectively.
When referring to the nodes of ASTs, we follow [25] for the
naming conventions. An AST, as shown in Fig. 2(b), consists of
three types of nodes: 1) placeholder nodes; 2) API nodes; and 3)
syntax nodes. The placeholder nodes are not actual components
of a function but they link the function components together
to form a tree. All the ASTs have placeholder nodes, such as
“params,” signifying that its leaf nodes are function parameters,
or “stmnts” denoting its leaf being statements of various types.
According to [25], the API nodes refer to the types of function
return values and function parameters. They also can be variable
declarations and function calls. For instance, a function which
has a “void” return type will have a “void” node. A function
taking an int parameter will have an “int” node. The syntax nodes
are syntactic elements that include control ﬂow elements and
operators. The control ﬂow elements are derived from while/do
while statements, if/else statements, etc. If a function contains an
if/else statement, it will have “if” and “else” nodes in its AST.
As for operators, such as “+,” “−,” or “=,” they will remain
unchanged.
B. AST Reﬁning
1) Code Structure Preserving: With the parsed ASTs in a
serialized format, they need to be transformed to vectors so
that they can be processed by ML algorithms. To preserve the
structural information of ASTs, we applied the same method
addressed in our previous work [11]. First, the ASTs have to
be traversed, allowing their components to be assembled in a
uniform sequence to form vectors. In this paper, we use a DFT
to map the AST elements to vectors. In future work, we will
examine whether breadth-ﬁrst traversal yields better results in
the subsequent classiﬁcation process.
With serialized ASTs, using DFT is straightforward, as the
serialized format [see Fig. 2(c)] is written in a depth-ﬁrst search
sequence from top to bottom. For every AST, we map its nodes
to a vector so that each node becomes an element in the vector.
To preserve the structural information of ASTs, the sequence of
each element matters. Take function foo shown in Fig. 2(a) for
example, the root of its AST [see Fig. 2(b)], being a function’s
name: foo, will be mapped to the ﬁrst element of the vector.
The second and third layer of the AST, which usually contain
the “params” node, return type and the parameter type, will be
the second, third, and fourth element of the vector respectively,
and likewise for the subsequent nodes. After mapping the AST
of function foo to a vector, it will be of the form like [foo, int,
params, int, x, stmnts, decl, int, y, =, call, bar, ...]. For this textual
vector, we treat it as a “sentence” with semantic meanings. The
semantic meaning is formed by the elements of the vector and
their sequence. For instance, function baz in Fig. 2(a) is similar
to function foo, both of which take a parameter x of type int
and return an int value. They also share the same names of local
variables and have for, if statements and call the same function.
However, they are different in terms of behavior. When mapping
function baz to a vector: [baz, int, params, int, x, stmnts, decl,
int, y, =, decl, int, ...], we can immediately recognize that the
sequence of elements of vector baz differs from that of vector
Authorized licensed use limited to: INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY MADRAS. Downloaded on December 01,2025 at 12:37:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- END OF 11. Cross-Project_Transfer_Representation_Learning_for_Vulnerable_Function_Discovery.pdf ---



--- START OF 2508.18933v1 (1).pdf ---

VISION: Robust and Interpretable Code Vulnerability Detection
Leveraging Counterfactual Augmentation
David Egea12, Barproda Halder1, Sanghamitra Dutta1
1University of Maryland College Park
2Universidad Pontificia Comillas
davidegea@alu.comillas.edu, bhalder@umd.edu, sanghamd@umd.edu
Abstract
Automated detection of vulnerabilities in source code is an
essential cybersecurity challenge, underpinning trust in dig-
ital systems and services. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
have emerged as a promising approach as they can learn
the structural and logical code relationships in a data-driven
manner. However, the performance of GNNs is severely lim-
ited by training data imbalances and label noise. GNNs can
often learn “spurious” correlations due to superficial code
similarities in the training data, leading to detectors that do
not generalize well to unseen real-world data. In this work,
we propose a new unified framework for robust and inter-
pretable vulnerability detection—that we call VISION—to
mitigate spurious correlations by systematically augmenting
a counterfactual training dataset. Counterfactuals are samples
with minimal semantic modifications that have opposite pre-
diction labels. Our complete framework includes: (i) gener-
ating effective counterfactuals by prompting a Large Lan-
guage Model (LLM); (ii) targeted GNN model training on
synthetically paired code examples with opposite labels; and
(iii) graph-based interpretability to identify the truly crucial
code statements relevant for vulnerability predictions while
ignoring the spurious ones. We find that our framework re-
duces spurious learning and enables more robust and gener-
alizable vulnerability detection, as demonstrated by improve-
ments in overall accuracy (from 51.8% to 97.8%), pairwise
contrast accuracy (from 4.5% to 95.8%), and worst-group ac-
curacy increasing (from 0.7% to 85.5%) on the widely pop-
ular Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE)-20 vulnerabil-
ity. We also demonstrate improvements using our proposed
metrics, namely, intra-class attribution variance, inter-class
attribution distance, and node score dependency. We provide
a new benchmark for vulnerability detection, CWE-20-CFA,
comprising 27,556 samples from functions affected by the
high-impact and frequently occurring CWE-20 vulnerabil-
ity, including both real and counterfactual examples. Further-
more, our approach enhances societal objectives of transpar-
ent and trustworthy AI-based cybersecurity systems through
interactive visualization for human-in-the-loop analysis.
1
Introduction
Software vulnerabilities remain a primary entry point for cy-
berattacks, making early and accurate detection essential for
This is the authors’ preprint version. The paper has been ac-
cepted for publication at AIES 2025. Copyright is held by the As-
sociation for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI).
securing modern digital systems (Chernis and Verma 2018).
The deep syntactic and semantic structure of code remains
difficult for traditional static and dynamic analysis tools to
model, restricting their applicability and effectiveness (Ya-
maguchi et al. 2014). To this end, Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) (Scarselli et al. 2009; Wang et al. 2023) offer a
promising approach for vulnerability detection by represent-
ing source code as graphs that capture syntax, control flow,
and data dependencies. Architectures such as Devign (Zhou
et al. 2019) exemplify the potential of GNN-based methods
to automatically learn complex program semantics and sup-
port data-driven vulnerability detection.
However, the effectiveness of GNN-based detectors is
constrained by the quality of the datasets they are trained
on. Popular benchmarks often suffer from label duplication,
class imbalance, and inconsistent or noisy labeling (Ding
et al. 2024; Guo and Bettaieb 2023; Croft, Babar, and
Kholoosi 2023), which can lead to spurious correlations.
Spurious correlations are formally defined as statistical as-
sociations between input features and target labels that do
not reflect a true causal relationship; instead, they arise
from coincidental patterns or confounding variables in the
data (Haig 2003; Ye et al. 2024; Bell and Wang 2024; Stein-
mann et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2023a; Halder et al. 2024).
Models influenced by such correlations may appear accu-
rate during training but often fail to generalize, as they rely
on misleading or dataset-specific signals. These limitations
are further compounded by the fact that GNN-based detec-
tors behave as opaque boxes, offering limited interpretability
and transparency into their decision-making process. Simply
predicting vulnerabilities is not enough, as it remains unclear
what aspects of the input does the model rely on and if those
aspects are really crucial. Without this understanding, it be-
comes difficult to ensure robust and trustworthy decisions.
To address these limitations, we propose VISION
(Vulnerability Identification and Spuriousness mitigation
via counterfactual augmentatION), a unified framework
for robust and interpretable vulnerability detection by
systematically augmenting a counterfactual dataset. In
our context, we define counterfactuals as minimally al-
tered code examples whose vulnerability labels are in-
verted (e.g., from vulnerable to benign or vice versa), in-
spired from counterfactual explanations in tabular clas-
sification (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2018). As
arXiv:2508.18933v1  [cs.AI]  26 Aug 2025
a simple illustration, consider the transformation of a
line like strcpy(dest, "fixed string"); into
strcpy(dest, user input);. While syntactically
similar, the latter introduces a potential vulnerability by in-
corporating unvalidated input. By generating such minimally
modified examples during training, our framework encour-
ages GNN models to better distinguish genuine vulnerability
patterns from spurious ones. To support this, we train a GNN
model inspired by the Devign architecture (Zhou et al. 2019)
on these counterfactual pairs, and then integrate the Illumi-
nati explainer (He, Ji, and Huang 2023) to identify the most
influential code statements via subgraph-based attributions.
We evaluate our framework on a challenging large-scale
vulnerability detection dataset called the Common Weak-
ness Enumeration (CWE)-20 (MITRE 2025), consisting
of Improper Input Validation—a high-impact vulnerability
ranked 4th in the 2022 CWE Top 25—highlighting our po-
tential to enhance robustness and generalization in critical
security contexts. We find that counterfactual augmentation
leads to substantial improvements across key robustness and
generalization metrics—including pairwise accuracy (rising
from 4.5% to 95.8%) and worst-group accuracy (from 0.7%
to over 85%)—demonstrating our effectiveness in mitigating
spurious correlations and enhancing model generalization.
Our framework also includes an interactive visualization
module for attributing the most influential statements in the
source code (explainable inspection) for human-in-the-loop
settings. Explanations generated under our framework tend
to prioritize semantically relevant code regions, suggesting
reduced reliance on spurious patterns. In essence, our frame-
work VISION is a significant advancement in explainability
for vulnerability detection, that can potentially help practi-
tioners understand why code is flagged as risky, enabling
more reliable remediation (Sharma et al. 2022).
To summarize, our key contributions are:
• Novel counterfactual data augmentation strategy
leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs) to improve
the robustness of GNN-based vulnerability detection by
effectively mitigating spurious correlations.
• Empirical validation on a challenging vulnerability
detection dataset called CWE-20, demonstrating sub-
stantial improvements on several generalization metrics,
showcasing a scalable way to improve performance with-
out relying on new data sources.
• Extensive benchmark that we call CWE-20-CFA con-
structed by generating counterfactual examples from ex-
isting CWE-20 samples.
• Visualization module for qualitative analysis of the
model’s decision-making, showing more semantically-
meaningful input source code attributions.
2
Related Work
Vulnerability Detection with Machine Learning.
Early
machine learning methods used handcrafted features like to-
ken frequencies and structural cues but struggled to gener-
alize across codebases (Neuhaus et al. 2007; Chernis and
Verma 2018). Deep learning improved detection leveraging
RNNs for sequential dependencies (Ziems and Wu 2021),
CNNs for local patterns (Wu et al. 2022), and transform-
ers like CodeBERT and GraphCodeBERT for long-range
context (Feng et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2021). GNNs model
source code as structured graphs (Scarselli et al. 2009; Zhou
et al. 2019; Yamaguchi et al. 2014), thus enhancing ro-
bustness. LLMs have also been directly applied for cross-
language and general-purpose vulnerability detection (Sul-
tana, Afreen, and Eisty 2024; Zhou, Zhang, and Lo 2024).
Dataset Quality and Challenges.
Label noise is a critical
problem, with mislabeling rates reported between 20–71%
in several benchmark datasets (Croft, Babar, and Kholoosi
2023). Duplication rates from 17–99% can cause overfit-
ting to surface-level patterns, while class imbalance biases
models toward non-vulnerable classes (Guo and Bettaieb
2023). Sample similarity—where inter-class examples are
too alike, or intra-class examples are too diverse—further
complicates learning (Liu et al. 2022b). Recent datasets like
PrimeVul (Ding et al. 2024) introduce stricter de-duplication
and validation. Others, such as DiverseVul (Chen et al.
2023b), aim to increase linguistic and structural diversity,
improving generalization. Yet high-quality, well-balanced
vulnerability datasets remain scarce, posing a significant
barrier to developing robust detection models.
Data Augmentation Strategies for Source Code.
Aug-
mentation methods for vulnerability detection aim to pre-
serve both syntactic validity and semantic meaning. Tech-
niques include CodeGraphSMOTE (Ganz et al. 2023),
which interpolates in graph latent space to balance datasets,
and transformation-based methods that diversify code while
preserving labels (Liu et al. 2024). LLM-based approaches
like VulScribeR (Daneshvar et al. 2024) offer scalable syn-
thesis of vulnerable code. Outside of the source code do-
main, other related works (Kaushik, Hovy, and Lipton 2020;
Ross, Marasovi´c, and Peters 2021; Dissanayake and Dutta
2024; Temraz and Keane 2021; Ding et al. 2022; Kong
et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022a) have explored strategies for
augmenting synthetic examples in the dataset, e.g., find-
ing counterfactuals via optimization for numeric data, man-
ually creating new examples for text data, oversampling
underrepresented groups, or perturbation-based techniques.
However, counterfactual augmentation for code vulnera-
bility detection—focusing on minimal, label-flipping edits
leveraging an LLM—remains largely unexplored.
Explainability
in
Vulnerability
Detection.
Model-
agnostic tools like SHAP and LIME explain feature
contributions (Lundberg and Lee 2017; Ribeiro, Singh,
and Guestrin 2016). In code analysis, IVDetect (Li, Wang,
and Nguyen 2021) leverages program dependency graphs
to localize vulnerabilities. CFExplainer (Chu et al. 2024)
generates counterfactuals to highlight decision boundaries.
GNNExplainer and PGM-Explainer provide subgraph-
based explanations for GNNs (Ying et al. 2019; Vu and
Thai 2020). Illuminati (He, Ji, and Huang 2023) is a
domain-specific explainer for GNNs in cybersecurity that
identifies the most influential nodes, edges, and attributes in
a prediction, producing interpretable subgraphs that clarify
the model’s decision-making process. Notably, Illuminati
Figure 1: Complete architecture of our VISION Framework.
Starting from the original PrimeVul dataset, the framework
illustrates the end-to-end process: dataset filtering to CWE-
20, counterfactual generation and class balancing, graph
construction via Joern-generated CPGs, embedding extrac-
tion, model training using Devign, and finally, explanation
generation with Illuminati and integration of a visualization
module for interpretability.
only reveals the underlying decision logic given a specific
model, and does not mitigate spuriousness or improve
model performance. Instead, our work unifies spuriousness
mitigation and explanation in a single framework VISION
to identify the truly crucial parts of the source code.
While we incorporate Illuminati as an internal explainer,
we complement it with an interactive, human-in-the-loop
visualization module, enabling users to inspect attributions
on the same input in a user-friendly manner, essential for
real-world applicability.
3
Proposed Framework: VISION
This section presents the VISION framework 1, designed to
enhance the robustness and interpretability of vulnerability
detection systems. Focusing on the CWE-20 vulnerability
from the PrimeVul (Ding et al. 2024), our framework gener-
ates counterfactuals—minimally edited examples with op-
posite labels—by leveraging LLMs to balance the training
data and improve generalization. Code samples are parsed
into Code Property Graphs (CPGs) using Joern, and then
embedded for input to the Devign model. Interpretability
is achieved through the Illuminati explainer, with an addi-
tional interactive module supporting qualitative analysis of
the model’s input attributions. Figure 1 illustrates the full
architecture.
1The implementation of the VISION framework is publicly
available at https://github.com/David-Egea/VISION.
Figure 2: CWE-20 Improper Input Validation example.
The function validGlxScreen checks whether the input
screen is greater than or equal to the number of available
screens, but fails to validate negative values. This omission
allows invalid array access and illustrates a classic case of
insufficient input validation.
Dataset Selection: CWE-20 Vulnerability
To evaluate our framework VISION under realistic condi-
tions, we derive our training and evaluation data from Prime-
Vul (Ding et al. 2024), a recently released high-quality vul-
nerability dataset for code language models. This dataset
was curated with human-verified labels and rigorous de-
duplication, resulting in lower label noise and high diversity
of real-world code patterns.
We focus exclusively on examples of CWE-20 (Improper
Input Validation) (see (MITRE 2025)). This vulnerability
class, characterized by the failure to properly sanitize or val-
idate external inputs, was chosen for three main reasons:
1. Clarity of semantics. Improper input validation vulner-
abilities often exhibit clear and recognizable coding pat-
terns, such as missing boundary checks or unchecked
buffer lengths, which facilitate both automated augmen-
tation and human analysis.
2. Data availability. PrimeVul contains a sufficient num-
ber of CWE-20 instances (∼14k) to support both model
training and reliable statistical evaluation without resort-
ing to over-sampling or synthetic over-generation.
3. Real-world relevance. CWE-20 vulnerabilities remain
among the most commonly exploited in practice, rein-
forcing the need for effective detection to strengthen soft-
ware security (MITRE 2022).
A simple, illustrative example from the CWE-20 dataset is
shown in Figure 2. The function validGlxScreen takes
a screen index and returns a pointer to its data. However,
it only checks whether screen is too large, neglecting neg-
ative values (or other invalid ranges), and thus allowing in-
valid dereferences.
Generalization to Other Vulnerabilities and Languages.
Although this study focuses on C source code exam-
ples of CWE-20 for illustrative purposes, VISION is a
general-purpose, dataset-agnostic framework. Applying it to
other CWEs (e.g. CWE-416 Use-After-Free or CWE-787
Out-of-Bounds Write), or even to a mixture of vulnerabil-
ities, would essentially follow the same process: (1) assem-
ble a corpus of code examples labeled with the target vul-
nerability where any initial class imbalance is acceptable;


--- END OF 2508.18933v1 (1).pdf ---



--- START OF 2508.18933v1.pdf ---

VISION: Robust and Interpretable Code Vulnerability Detection
Leveraging Counterfactual Augmentation
David Egea12, Barproda Halder1, Sanghamitra Dutta1
1University of Maryland College Park
2Universidad Pontificia Comillas
davidegea@alu.comillas.edu, bhalder@umd.edu, sanghamd@umd.edu
Abstract
Automated detection of vulnerabilities in source code is an
essential cybersecurity challenge, underpinning trust in dig-
ital systems and services. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
have emerged as a promising approach as they can learn
the structural and logical code relationships in a data-driven
manner. However, the performance of GNNs is severely lim-
ited by training data imbalances and label noise. GNNs can
often learn “spurious” correlations due to superficial code
similarities in the training data, leading to detectors that do
not generalize well to unseen real-world data. In this work,
we propose a new unified framework for robust and inter-
pretable vulnerability detection—that we call VISION—to
mitigate spurious correlations by systematically augmenting
a counterfactual training dataset. Counterfactuals are samples
with minimal semantic modifications that have opposite pre-
diction labels. Our complete framework includes: (i) gener-
ating effective counterfactuals by prompting a Large Lan-
guage Model (LLM); (ii) targeted GNN model training on
synthetically paired code examples with opposite labels; and
(iii) graph-based interpretability to identify the truly crucial
code statements relevant for vulnerability predictions while
ignoring the spurious ones. We find that our framework re-
duces spurious learning and enables more robust and gener-
alizable vulnerability detection, as demonstrated by improve-
ments in overall accuracy (from 51.8% to 97.8%), pairwise
contrast accuracy (from 4.5% to 95.8%), and worst-group ac-
curacy increasing (from 0.7% to 85.5%) on the widely pop-
ular Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE)-20 vulnerabil-
ity. We also demonstrate improvements using our proposed
metrics, namely, intra-class attribution variance, inter-class
attribution distance, and node score dependency. We provide
a new benchmark for vulnerability detection, CWE-20-CFA,
comprising 27,556 samples from functions affected by the
high-impact and frequently occurring CWE-20 vulnerabil-
ity, including both real and counterfactual examples. Further-
more, our approach enhances societal objectives of transpar-
ent and trustworthy AI-based cybersecurity systems through
interactive visualization for human-in-the-loop analysis.
1
Introduction
Software vulnerabilities remain a primary entry point for cy-
berattacks, making early and accurate detection essential for
This is the authors’ preprint version. The paper has been ac-
cepted for publication at AIES 2025. Copyright is held by the As-
sociation for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI).
securing modern digital systems (Chernis and Verma 2018).
The deep syntactic and semantic structure of code remains
difficult for traditional static and dynamic analysis tools to
model, restricting their applicability and effectiveness (Ya-
maguchi et al. 2014). To this end, Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs) (Scarselli et al. 2009; Wang et al. 2023) offer a
promising approach for vulnerability detection by represent-
ing source code as graphs that capture syntax, control flow,
and data dependencies. Architectures such as Devign (Zhou
et al. 2019) exemplify the potential of GNN-based methods
to automatically learn complex program semantics and sup-
port data-driven vulnerability detection.
However, the effectiveness of GNN-based detectors is
constrained by the quality of the datasets they are trained
on. Popular benchmarks often suffer from label duplication,
class imbalance, and inconsistent or noisy labeling (Ding
et al. 2024; Guo and Bettaieb 2023; Croft, Babar, and
Kholoosi 2023), which can lead to spurious correlations.
Spurious correlations are formally defined as statistical as-
sociations between input features and target labels that do
not reflect a true causal relationship; instead, they arise
from coincidental patterns or confounding variables in the
data (Haig 2003; Ye et al. 2024; Bell and Wang 2024; Stein-
mann et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2023a; Halder et al. 2024).
Models influenced by such correlations may appear accu-
rate during training but often fail to generalize, as they rely
on misleading or dataset-specific signals. These limitations
are further compounded by the fact that GNN-based detec-
tors behave as opaque boxes, offering limited interpretability
and transparency into their decision-making process. Simply
predicting vulnerabilities is not enough, as it remains unclear
what aspects of the input does the model rely on and if those
aspects are really crucial. Without this understanding, it be-
comes difficult to ensure robust and trustworthy decisions.
To address these limitations, we propose VISION
(Vulnerability Identification and Spuriousness mitigation
via counterfactual augmentatION), a unified framework
for robust and interpretable vulnerability detection by
systematically augmenting a counterfactual dataset. In
our context, we define counterfactuals as minimally al-
tered code examples whose vulnerability labels are in-
verted (e.g., from vulnerable to benign or vice versa), in-
spired from counterfactual explanations in tabular clas-
sification (Wachter, Mittelstadt, and Russell 2018). As
arXiv:2508.18933v1  [cs.AI]  26 Aug 2025
a simple illustration, consider the transformation of a
line like strcpy(dest, "fixed string"); into
strcpy(dest, user input);. While syntactically
similar, the latter introduces a potential vulnerability by in-
corporating unvalidated input. By generating such minimally
modified examples during training, our framework encour-
ages GNN models to better distinguish genuine vulnerability
patterns from spurious ones. To support this, we train a GNN
model inspired by the Devign architecture (Zhou et al. 2019)
on these counterfactual pairs, and then integrate the Illumi-
nati explainer (He, Ji, and Huang 2023) to identify the most
influential code statements via subgraph-based attributions.
We evaluate our framework on a challenging large-scale
vulnerability detection dataset called the Common Weak-
ness Enumeration (CWE)-20 (MITRE 2025), consisting
of Improper Input Validation—a high-impact vulnerability
ranked 4th in the 2022 CWE Top 25—highlighting our po-
tential to enhance robustness and generalization in critical
security contexts. We find that counterfactual augmentation
leads to substantial improvements across key robustness and
generalization metrics—including pairwise accuracy (rising
from 4.5% to 95.8%) and worst-group accuracy (from 0.7%
to over 85%)—demonstrating our effectiveness in mitigating
spurious correlations and enhancing model generalization.
Our framework also includes an interactive visualization
module for attributing the most influential statements in the
source code (explainable inspection) for human-in-the-loop
settings. Explanations generated under our framework tend
to prioritize semantically relevant code regions, suggesting
reduced reliance on spurious patterns. In essence, our frame-
work VISION is a significant advancement in explainability
for vulnerability detection, that can potentially help practi-
tioners understand why code is flagged as risky, enabling
more reliable remediation (Sharma et al. 2022).
To summarize, our key contributions are:
• Novel counterfactual data augmentation strategy
leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs) to improve
the robustness of GNN-based vulnerability detection by
effectively mitigating spurious correlations.
• Empirical validation on a challenging vulnerability
detection dataset called CWE-20, demonstrating sub-
stantial improvements on several generalization metrics,
showcasing a scalable way to improve performance with-
out relying on new data sources.
• Extensive benchmark that we call CWE-20-CFA con-
structed by generating counterfactual examples from ex-
isting CWE-20 samples.
• Visualization module for qualitative analysis of the
model’s decision-making, showing more semantically-
meaningful input source code attributions.
2
Related Work
Vulnerability Detection with Machine Learning.
Early
machine learning methods used handcrafted features like to-
ken frequencies and structural cues but struggled to gener-
alize across codebases (Neuhaus et al. 2007; Chernis and
Verma 2018). Deep learning improved detection leveraging
RNNs for sequential dependencies (Ziems and Wu 2021),
CNNs for local patterns (Wu et al. 2022), and transform-
ers like CodeBERT and GraphCodeBERT for long-range
context (Feng et al. 2020; Guo et al. 2021). GNNs model
source code as structured graphs (Scarselli et al. 2009; Zhou
et al. 2019; Yamaguchi et al. 2014), thus enhancing ro-
bustness. LLMs have also been directly applied for cross-
language and general-purpose vulnerability detection (Sul-
tana, Afreen, and Eisty 2024; Zhou, Zhang, and Lo 2024).
Dataset Quality and Challenges.
Label noise is a critical
problem, with mislabeling rates reported between 20–71%
in several benchmark datasets (Croft, Babar, and Kholoosi
2023). Duplication rates from 17–99% can cause overfit-
ting to surface-level patterns, while class imbalance biases
models toward non-vulnerable classes (Guo and Bettaieb
2023). Sample similarity—where inter-class examples are
too alike, or intra-class examples are too diverse—further
complicates learning (Liu et al. 2022b). Recent datasets like
PrimeVul (Ding et al. 2024) introduce stricter de-duplication
and validation. Others, such as DiverseVul (Chen et al.
2023b), aim to increase linguistic and structural diversity,
improving generalization. Yet high-quality, well-balanced
vulnerability datasets remain scarce, posing a significant
barrier to developing robust detection models.
Data Augmentation Strategies for Source Code.
Aug-
mentation methods for vulnerability detection aim to pre-
serve both syntactic validity and semantic meaning. Tech-
niques include CodeGraphSMOTE (Ganz et al. 2023),
which interpolates in graph latent space to balance datasets,
and transformation-based methods that diversify code while
preserving labels (Liu et al. 2024). LLM-based approaches
like VulScribeR (Daneshvar et al. 2024) offer scalable syn-
thesis of vulnerable code. Outside of the source code do-
main, other related works (Kaushik, Hovy, and Lipton 2020;
Ross, Marasovi´c, and Peters 2021; Dissanayake and Dutta
2024; Temraz and Keane 2021; Ding et al. 2022; Kong
et al. 2022; Liu et al. 2022a) have explored strategies for
augmenting synthetic examples in the dataset, e.g., find-
ing counterfactuals via optimization for numeric data, man-
ually creating new examples for text data, oversampling
underrepresented groups, or perturbation-based techniques.
However, counterfactual augmentation for code vulnera-
bility detection—focusing on minimal, label-flipping edits
leveraging an LLM—remains largely unexplored.
Explainability
in
Vulnerability
Detection.
Model-
agnostic tools like SHAP and LIME explain feature
contributions (Lundberg and Lee 2017; Ribeiro, Singh,
and Guestrin 2016). In code analysis, IVDetect (Li, Wang,
and Nguyen 2021) leverages program dependency graphs
to localize vulnerabilities. CFExplainer (Chu et al. 2024)
generates counterfactuals to highlight decision boundaries.
GNNExplainer and PGM-Explainer provide subgraph-
based explanations for GNNs (Ying et al. 2019; Vu and
Thai 2020). Illuminati (He, Ji, and Huang 2023) is a
domain-specific explainer for GNNs in cybersecurity that
identifies the most influential nodes, edges, and attributes in
a prediction, producing interpretable subgraphs that clarify
the model’s decision-making process. Notably, Illuminati
Figure 1: Complete architecture of our VISION Framework.
Starting from the original PrimeVul dataset, the framework
illustrates the end-to-end process: dataset filtering to CWE-
20, counterfactual generation and class balancing, graph
construction via Joern-generated CPGs, embedding extrac-
tion, model training using Devign, and finally, explanation
generation with Illuminati and integration of a visualization
module for interpretability.
only reveals the underlying decision logic given a specific
model, and does not mitigate spuriousness or improve
model performance. Instead, our work unifies spuriousness
mitigation and explanation in a single framework VISION
to identify the truly crucial parts of the source code.
While we incorporate Illuminati as an internal explainer,
we complement it with an interactive, human-in-the-loop
visualization module, enabling users to inspect attributions
on the same input in a user-friendly manner, essential for
real-world applicability.
3
Proposed Framework: VISION
This section presents the VISION framework 1, designed to
enhance the robustness and interpretability of vulnerability
detection systems. Focusing on the CWE-20 vulnerability
from the PrimeVul (Ding et al. 2024), our framework gener-
ates counterfactuals—minimally edited examples with op-
posite labels—by leveraging LLMs to balance the training
data and improve generalization. Code samples are parsed
into Code Property Graphs (CPGs) using Joern, and then
embedded for input to the Devign model. Interpretability
is achieved through the Illuminati explainer, with an addi-
tional interactive module supporting qualitative analysis of
the model’s input attributions. Figure 1 illustrates the full
architecture.
1The implementation of the VISION framework is publicly
available at https://github.com/David-Egea/VISION.
Figure 2: CWE-20 Improper Input Validation example.
The function validGlxScreen checks whether the input
screen is greater than or equal to the number of available
screens, but fails to validate negative values. This omission
allows invalid array access and illustrates a classic case of
insufficient input validation.
Dataset Selection: CWE-20 Vulnerability
To evaluate our framework VISION under realistic condi-
tions, we derive our training and evaluation data from Prime-
Vul (Ding et al. 2024), a recently released high-quality vul-
nerability dataset for code language models. This dataset
was curated with human-verified labels and rigorous de-
duplication, resulting in lower label noise and high diversity
of real-world code patterns.
We focus exclusively on examples of CWE-20 (Improper
Input Validation) (see (MITRE 2025)). This vulnerability
class, characterized by the failure to properly sanitize or val-
idate external inputs, was chosen for three main reasons:
1. Clarity of semantics. Improper input validation vulner-
abilities often exhibit clear and recognizable coding pat-
terns, such as missing boundary checks or unchecked
buffer lengths, which facilitate both automated augmen-
tation and human analysis.
2. Data availability. PrimeVul contains a sufficient num-
ber of CWE-20 instances (∼14k) to support both model
training and reliable statistical evaluation without resort-
ing to over-sampling or synthetic over-generation.
3. Real-world relevance. CWE-20 vulnerabilities remain
among the most commonly exploited in practice, rein-
forcing the need for effective detection to strengthen soft-
ware security (MITRE 2022).
A simple, illustrative example from the CWE-20 dataset is
shown in Figure 2. The function validGlxScreen takes
a screen index and returns a pointer to its data. However,
it only checks whether screen is too large, neglecting neg-
ative values (or other invalid ranges), and thus allowing in-
valid dereferences.
Generalization to Other Vulnerabilities and Languages.
Although this study focuses on C source code exam-
ples of CWE-20 for illustrative purposes, VISION is a
general-purpose, dataset-agnostic framework. Applying it to
other CWEs (e.g. CWE-416 Use-After-Free or CWE-787
Out-of-Bounds Write), or even to a mixture of vulnerabil-
ities, would essentially follow the same process: (1) assem-
ble a corpus of code examples labeled with the target vul-
nerability where any initial class imbalance is acceptable;


--- END OF 2508.18933v1.pdf ---



--- START OF 2510.10321v1.pdf ---

Bridging Semantics & Structure for Software
Vulnerability Detection using Hybrid Network
Models
Jugal Gajjar1, Kaustik Ranaware1, and Kamalasankari
Subramaniakuppusamy1
1The George Washington University, Washington D.C, USA
jugal.gajjar@gwu.edu, k.ranaware@gwu.edu, and kamalasankaris@gwu.edu
Abstract. Software vulnerabilities remain a persistent risk, yet static
and dynamic analyses often overlook structural dependencies that shape
insecure behaviors. Viewing programs as heterogeneous graphs, we cap-
ture control- and data-flow relations as complex interaction networks.
Our hybrid framework combines these graph representations with light-
weight (<4B) local LLMs, uniting topological features with semantic
reasoning while avoiding the cost and privacy concerns of large cloud
models. Evaluated on Java vulnerability detection (binary classification),
our method achieves 93.57% accuracy—an 8.36% gain over Graph At-
tention Network-based embeddings and 17.81% over pretrained LLM
baselines such as Qwen2.5 Coder 3B. Beyond accuracy, the approach
extracts salient subgraphs and generates natural language explanations,
improving interpretability for developers. These results pave the way for
scalable, explainable, and locally deployable tools that can shift vulner-
ability analysis from purely syntactic checks to deeper structural and
semantic insights, facilitating broader adoption in real-world secure soft-
ware development.
Keywords: software vulnerability detection, graph neural network, large
language model, code analysis, structural–semantic fusion
1
Introduction
Software vulnerabilities remain a critical threat to modern computing systems,
from enterprise platforms to critical infrastructure. Real-world incidents such as
Log4Shell [1] and the SolarWinds [2] compromise highlight how flaws can propa-
gate across interconnected components with devastating impact. Large software
projects can be naturally modeled as complex networks, where nodes correspond
to program elements (e.g., functions, statements) and edges capture control- or
data-flow dependencies. These networks exhibit structural properties such as
modularity, degree distributions, and path dependencies that shape how vul-
nerabilities emerge and spread [3]. Capturing such dynamics is key to detecting
flaws often missed by traditional analyses.
arXiv:2510.10321v1  [cs.SE]  11 Oct 2025
2
Jugal Gajjar et al.
Conventional representations such as control-flow graphs (CFGs) or abstract
syntax trees (ASTs) highlight local structure but fail to capture global connectiv-
ity or semantic intent [4,5]. In contrast, large language models (LLMs) excel at
semantic reasoning over token sequences but overlook program topology, limiting
their ability to model complex multi-element interactions [6]. Graph embeddings
capture connectivity yet struggle to encode execution semantics [7,8]. The chal-
lenge, therefore, is clear: how can structural properties of program networks and
semantic reasoning of LLMs be fused for effective vulnerability detection?
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first framework that unifies graph-
based embeddings of Java programs with lightweight (<4B) local LLMs. Specifi-
cally, we (1) design a two-way gating mechanism that adaptively aligns structural
and semantic spaces, (2) apply contrastive learning with InfoNCE objectives [9]
to enforce cross-view consistency, (3) incorporate graph Laplacian regulariza-
tion [10] to promote smoothness across directed CFGs, and (4) deliver inter-
pretability through top-K saliency subgraphs with natural language explana-
tions.
By foregrounding interpretability alongside accuracy, our approach ensures
developers gain actionable insights rather than opaque predictions. Ultimately,
we demonstrate that fusing network-theoretic and semantic perspectives yields
state-of-the-art vulnerability detection with transparency, scalability, and de-
ployability in privacy-preserving settings.
2
Related Work
Traditional static analysis techniques detect vulnerabilities through fixed rule-
sets, offering precision for certain flaw classes but suffering from high false posi-
tives and limited ability to capture runtime-dependent issues [11,12]. These ap-
proaches emphasize local code structure without modeling the broader network
of interactions among program elements [4]. Dynamic analysis, by monitoring
execution, exposes runtime errors such as leaks or deadlocks but struggles with
incomplete path coverage and high testing overheads [5].
ML and DL methods extend these approaches by learning vulnerability pat-
terns from large datasets. Sequence-based methods such as VulDeePecker [13]
and SySeVR [14] capture local ordering of tokens, while MalCodeAI [15] inte-
grates LLM-based detectors with explainability. However, they underutilize the
complex network structure of software, where vulnerabilities often arise from
cycles, hubs, and long-range dependencies—phenomena well-studied in network
science but rarely modeled in vulnerability detection.
LLMs trained on source code exhibit strong semantic reasoning [22], yet
their limited context windows hinder capturing higher-order connectivity across
functions and modules. Graph-based models such as Devign [19] leverage ASTs
or CFGs to encode dependencies, but often reduce networks to local neighbor-
hoods, missing global structural features like motifs or community-level inter-
actions that may reveal systemic weaknesses. This gap mirrors broader findings
Bridging Semantics & Structure for Vuln. Detection
3
Table 1. Comparison of approaches for software vulnerability detection.
Method
Vul. Detect. Code Behav. Code Cover. Structural Semantics
Static Anal.
✓
×
×
✓
×
Dynamic Anal.
✓
✓
×
×
×
ML/DL
✓
✓
×
×
✓
LLMs
✓
✓
×
×
✓
Graph Models
✓
×
✓
✓
×
Our Work
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
in complex network research, where global topology and local patterns jointly
explain emergent behaviors.
Recent GNN advances for vulnerability detection show promise but face key
limitations. VulGraB [16] uses bi-directional gated GNNs but focuses on local
neighborhoods, missing global patterns. Yang et al. [17] propose tensor-based
gated GNNs that struggle with long-range dependencies, while RGAN [18] uses
residual attention networks but misses higher-order motifs. These graph ap-
proaches excel at structural modeling but fail to capture code semantics essen-
tial for subtle vulnerability patterns, treating code as abstract nodes without se-
mantic richness. Additionally, most work targets low-level languages (C/C++,
Assembly) using benchmarks like Devign [19], Juliet [20], and MegaVul [21],
while Java remains underexplored despite widespread production deployment
and unique runtime characteristics.
Our work addresses these limitations by integrating network-theoretic and
ML perspectives: we model programs as directed graphs to capture higher-order
execution dependencies and fuse them with lightweight local LLM embeddings
for semantic reasoning. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first framework
to apply such a hybrid approach to Java, enabling scalable, privacy-preserving,
and interpretable vulnerability detection.
Table 1 summarizes how different approaches address vulnerability detection.
3
Methodology
This section describes the proposed hybrid framework that fuses graph-structured
program representations with LLM-derived semantic embeddings for vulnerabil-
ity detection. We first present the code-as-network representation and embed-
ding extraction pipeline, then formalize the projection and fusion modules (with
emphasis on our proposed two-way gating fusion), present the composite train-
ing objective (classification + contrastive alignment [9] + Laplacian regulariza-
tion [10]), and finally describe the explanation mechanisms used at inference.
3.1
Code as a Graph
We represent each program unit (function / file) as a control-flow graph (CFG)
G = (V, E) where nodes v ∈V correspond to program statements or basic blocks


--- END OF 2510.10321v1.pdf ---



--- START OF StreamGuard_Architecture.docx ---



StreamGuard
Full System Architecture
Novel Neuro-Symbolic Vulnerability Detection with Counterfactual Augmentation
Research-grounded  •  Production-grade  •  Interpretable


March 2026  |  Version 1.0

1. Research Foundation & State of the Art (2024–2025)

StreamGuard's architecture is grounded in the most recent peer-reviewed research from top venues (AAAI, ACM ISSTA, Nature, IEEE). The following findings directly shape every architectural decision.

1.1 What Research Has Proven Works

1.2 What the Research Shows Does NOT Work


2. Full System Architecture Overview

★  Novel Contribution: StreamGuard's novel contribution is the integration of three research advances into a single pipeline: (1) Vul-LMGNN joint CodeBERT+GGNN training, (2) VISION-style LLM counterfactual data augmentation, and (3) VulnSC-style inter-procedural callee summarization. No existing production system combines all three.

2.1 High-Level System Diagram
┌─ StreamGuard System ──────────────────────────────────────┐
│  ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐ │
│  │                   DATA PLANE                                 │ │
│  │  CVE/NVD ──┐                                                 │ │
│  │  GitHub ───┤                                                 │ │
│  │  OSV ──────┼──► Collection Pipeline ──► Canonical Store      │ │
│  │  ExploitDB ┤        (6 collectors)      (JSONL + SQLite)     │ │
│  │  SARD ─────┤                                │                │ │
│  │  Repos ────┘                                ▼                │ │
│  │                                  CFA Generator               │ │
│  │                              (LLM counterfactuals)           │ │
│  └─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────-┘ │
│                                │                              │
│                                ▼                              │
│  ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐ │
│  │                 FEATURE EXTRACTION PLANE                     │ │
│  │  Joern ──► CPG Builder ──► AST + CFG + DFG + TaintPG         │ │
│  │               │              │                               │ │
│  │               ▼              ▼                               │ │
│  │         LLVM-IR Graph   Node Embeddings (CodeBERT)           │ │
│  │               └──────────────┘                               │ │
│  │                      │                                       │ │
│  │             Inter-Procedural Context                         │ │
│  │          (LLM callee summaries per VulnSC)                   │ │
│  └──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘ │
│                                │                              │
│                                ▼                              │
│  ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐ │
│  │                    MODEL PLANE                               │ │
│  │                                                              │ │
│  │   CodeBERT ──► [CLS] Embedding (768-d)                       │ │
│  │       +                    │                                 │ │
│  │   4-Type CPG ──► GGNN ──► Graph Embedding (256-d)            │ │
│  │       +              │           │                           │ │
│  │   Taint Paths ◄──────┘           │                           │ │
│  │                                  │                           │ │
│  │            Fusion Layer (Cross-Attention + MLP)              │ │
│  │                                  │                           │ │
│  │                     CWE Classifier (12 classes)              │ │
│  │                     Severity Scorer (CVSS-proxy)             │ │
│  │                     Explanation Generator (Illuminati)       │ │
│  └──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘ │
│                                │                              │
│                                ▼                              │
│  ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐ │
│  │                  SERVING PLANE                               │ │
│  │  REST API ──► Scan Endpoint ──► Real-time Detection          │ │
│  │  gRPC API ──► Batch Endpoint ──► CI/CD Integration           │ │
│  │  WebSocket ──► Stream Endpoint ──► IDE Plugin                │ │
│  └──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘ │
│                                │                              │
│                                ▼                              │
│  ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐ │
│  │              FEEDBACK & CONTINUOUS LEARNING PLANE            │ │
│  │  Dashboard ──► Human Review ──► Corrected Labels             │ │
│  │                                        │                     │ │
│  │               New CFA Pairs ◄──────────┘                     │ │
│  │               Re-training Pipeline ◄─────────────────────────┘ │
│  └──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘ │
└──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘


3. Data Plane — Collection, Storage & Counterfactual Augmentation

3.1 Data Collection Pipeline
Detailed collection specifications are in the companion document STREAMGUARD_IMPLEMENTATION.md. The architecture-level requirement is that all 7 sources feed into a canonical store before feature extraction begins.


3.2 Counterfactual Augmentation Pipeline (CFA) — Novel Component
★  Novel Contribution: VISION (AAAI/AIES 2025) proved that accuracy improved from 51.8% to 97.8% when GNNs are trained on counterfactual pairs. StreamGuard implements this as a persistent CFA pipeline that generates label-flipped minimal edits for every vulnerable sample using an LLM. This is NOT synthetic generation — it is semantics-preserving minimal surgery on real code.

3.2.1 CFA Definition
A counterfactual (CFA) sample for vulnerable code v is a minimally modified version v' such that:
The vulnerability is removed in v' (label flips from 1 → 0)
The modification is minimal — only the vulnerable statement(s) change
Syntactic validity is preserved — v' compiles without error
Semantic validity is preserved — the function's non-security logic is unchanged
The CPG of v and v' differ only at the vulnerability subgraph

3.2.2 CFA Generation Architecture
┌─ CFA Generation ──────────────────────────────────────────┐
│    Vulnerable Code (label=1)                                  │
│          │                                                    │
│          ▼                                                    │
│    ┌─────────────┐    ┌─────────────────────────────────────────┐ │
│    │  CPG Extract│    │  LLM Counterfactual Prompt               │ │
│    │  (Joern)    │───►│  'Generate a minimally different version  │ │
│    │  Taint Path │    │   of this C function where CWE-XX is fixed│ │
│    └─────────────┘    │   Preserve all non-security logic.'       │ │
│                       └──────────────────┬────────────────────────┘ │
│                                          │                    │
│                                          ▼                    │
│                                CFA Candidate (raw)            │
│                                          │                    │
│                            ┌─────────────┴──────────────┐     │
│                            │       Validation Gate       │    │
│                            │  1. gcc -fsyntax-only       │    │
│                            │  2. pycparser.parse_string  │    │
│                            │  3. CPG diff analysis:      │    │
│                            │     changed nodes ≤ 5       │    │
│                            │  4. Taint path eliminated   │    │
│                            └─────────────┬──────────────┘     │
│                                          │ PASS               │
│                                          ▼                    │
│                                CFA Sample (label=0)           │
│                                pair_id = original.id          │
│                                cfa_type = 'llm_generated'     │
└──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

3.2.3 CFA Prompt Template
CFA_PROMPT = '''
You are a C security expert. Below is a vulnerable C function with {cwe} ({cwe_name}).
 
VULNERABLE FUNCTION:
```c
{vulnerable_code}
```
 
VULNERABILITY LOCATION (Joern taint path):
{taint_path_description}
 
TASK: Generate a corrected version of EXACTLY this function that:
1. Fixes ONLY the {cwe} vulnerability — do NOT change any other logic
2. Changes the minimum number of lines necessary
3. Must compile with gcc -Wall -Werror without new warnings
4. Preserves all function parameters, return type, and non-security behavior
 
Output ONLY the corrected C function, no explanation.
'''

3.2.4 CFA Quality Metrics

3.3 Canonical Data Store


4. Feature Extraction Plane — CPG Construction & Embeddings

4.1 Code Property Graph (4-Component CPG)
Based on AUG-PDG research and VulPatrol findings, StreamGuard uses a 4-component CPG. Using AST+CFG+DFG is standard; the novel addition is the Taint Propagation Graph as a 4th component.


4.2 CPG Construction Pipeline
┌─ CPG Construction ────────────────────────────────────────┐
│    C Source Code                                              │
│         │                                                     │
│         ▼                                                     │
│    ┌────────────┐                                             │
│    │  Joern 2.x  │  ← Generates AST + CFG + PDG               │
│    │  (Scala/JVM)│    (Joern is the SOTA open-source CPG tool) │
│    └────────────┘                                             │
│         │                                                     │
│         ├─── AST nodes/edges ──► Neo4j label: ASTNode         │
│         ├─── CFG nodes/edges ──► Neo4j label: CFGNode         │
│         └─── DFG nodes/edges ──► Neo4j label: DFGNode         │
│                                          │                    │
│                               ┌──────────┴──────────┐         │
│                               │  Taint Propagation   │        │
│                               │  Analyzer (Python)   │        │
│                               │  Sources: scanf,gets, │       │
│                               │    argv, getenv, etc.│        │
│                               │  Sinks: strcpy,system│        │
│                               │    sprintf, printf   │        │
│                               │  Sanitizers: snprintf│        │
│                               │    strncpy, validate │        │
│                               └──────────┬──────────┘         │
│                                          │                    │
│                                          ▼                    │
│                               Neo4j label: TaintNode          │
│                               Taint path edges: FLOWS_TO      │
└──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

4.3 Node Embedding Strategy (Per Vul-LMGNN Research)
ℹ  Key Finding: The Vul-LMGNN paper proved that initializing GNN node embeddings with CodeBERT representations (rather than Word2Vec or one-hot) provides critical semantic richness. StreamGuard implements this with statement-level CodeBERT embeddings concatenated with node-type one-hot encodings.

Total node embedding dimension: 824-d (concatenation of all components)

4.4 Inter-Procedural Context Injection (VulnSC Method)
★  Novel Contribution: VulnSC (ISSTA 2025) demonstrated that function-level analysis misses inter-procedural vulnerabilities. StreamGuard adds LLM-generated callee summaries as auxiliary text attached to call-site nodes in the CPG. This is the first implementation of VulnSC-style inter-procedural context in a production C vulnerability detector.

┌─ Inter-Procedural Context ────────────────────────────────┐
│    Focal function under analysis: process_input(char *data)   │
│         │                                                     │
│         │  Contains call: validate_string(data)  ◄── callee   │
│         │                                                     │
│    ┌────┴────────────────────────────────────────────────┐    │
│    │  Inter-Procedural Context Injection                 │    │
│    │                                                     │    │
│    │  1. Joern extracts all call-site nodes in CPG       │    │
│    │  2. For each call: fetch callee source code         │    │
│    │  3. LLM prompt: 'Summarize what validate_string()   │    │
│    │     does to its input in 1-2 sentences. Focus on    │    │
│    │     security-relevant effects: sanitization,        │    │
│    │     validation, propagation of taint.'              │    │
│    │  4. Summary embedded with CodeBERT                  │    │
│    │  5. Injected as auxiliary feature on call-site node │    │
│    │     in the focal function's CPG                     │    │
│    └─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘    │
│         │                                                     │
│         ▼                                                     │
│    CPG now contains: native code structure + callee context   │
│    → Model sees: 'validate_string does NOT sanitize SQL chars' │
│    → Detection: correctly flags as CWE-89 (would miss without this) │
└──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘


5. Model Plane — Neural Architecture

5.1 Architecture Overview
┌─ Neural Architecture ─────────────────────────────────────┐
│    Input: C function (source code + CPG + CFA pair)           │
│                                           │                   │
│                ┌──────────────────────────┘                   │
│                │                                              │
│    ┌───────────▼──────────────────────────────────────────────┐ │
│    │               DUAL ENCODER STAGE                         │ │
│    │                                                          │ │
│    │  ┌─────────────────────┐   ┌──────────────────────────┐  │ │
│    │  │  Sequence Encoder   │   │   Graph Encoder (GGNN)   │  │ │
│    │  │  (CodeBERT)         │   │   Gated Graph Neural Net │  │ │
│    │  │                     │   │                          │  │ │
│    │  │  Token sequence ──► │   │  4-type CPG ──►          │  │ │
│    │  │  BPE tokenize ────► │   │  Node embed init ─────►  │  │ │
│    │  │  12-layer BERT ───► │   │  3-layer GGNN ────────►  │  │ │
│    │  │  [CLS] token ──────►│   │  Global mean pool ─────► │  │ │
│    │  │                     │   │                          │  │ │
│    │  │  Output: 768-d      │   │  Output: 256-d           │  │ │
│    └──┴─────────────────────┴───┴──────────────────────────┴──┘ │
│                │                             │                │
│                └──────────────┬──────────────┘                │
│                               │                               │
│    ┌──────────────────────────▼───────────────────────────────┐ │
│    │              CROSS-ATTENTION FUSION LAYER                │ │
│    │                                                          │ │
│    │  [CLS]_bert (768)  →  Query Q                            │ │
│    │  Graph_embed (256) →  Key K, Value V                     │ │
│    │                                                          │ │
│    │  Attn = softmax(QKᵀ / √d_k) · V                         │ │
│    │  Fused = concat([CLS]_bert, Attn, Graph_embed)           │ │
│    │  Fused_dim = 768 + 256 + 256 = 1280-d                    │ │
│    │                                                          │ │
│    │  MLP: 1280 → 512 → 128 → output heads                   │ │
│    └──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘ │
│                               │                               │
│                ┌──────────────┼──────────────┐                │
│                │              │              │                │
│    ┌───────────▼───┐  ┌───────▼──────┐  ┌───▼────────────┐    │
│    │ Binary Head   │  │  CWE Head    │  │ Severity Head  │    │
│    │ (vuln/safe)   │  │ (12-class)   │  │ (CVSS proxy)   │    │
│    │ BCE loss      │  │ CE loss      │  │ MSE loss       │    │
│    └───────────────┘  └──────────────┘  └────────────────┘    │
└──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

5.2 Gated Graph Neural Network (GGNN) Architecture
Based on Vul-LMGNN and VulPatrol research, the GGNN uses a GRU-based propagation scheme that retains dependency information across CPG edges:

5.3 CFA-Paired Training (Novel Training Objective)
★  Novel Contribution: Standard cross-entropy training teaches the model to classify. CFA-paired training adds a contrastive objective: the model must also assign different predictions to (v, v') pairs where v is vulnerable and v' is its counterfactual. This directly addresses the spurious correlation problem discovered by VISION.

# CFA-Paired Training Loss (Novel Objective)
 
L_total = λ_1 * L_CE + λ_2 * L_CFA + λ_3 * L_severity
 
# L_CE: standard binary cross-entropy on all samples
L_CE = BCELoss(pred_all, labels_all)
 
# L_CFA: contrastive loss on (vulnerable, counterfactual) pairs
# Forces the model to place v and v' on opposite sides of the decision boundary
# Uses cosine margin loss on the fused representation
for (v, v_prime) in cfa_pairs:
    emb_v      = fusion_layer(v)        # label=1
    emb_v_prime = fusion_layer(v_prime)  # label=0
    margin = 0.5
    cosine_sim = F.cosine_similarity(emb_v, emb_v_prime, dim=-1)
    L_CFA += relu(cosine_sim - margin)  # pull embeddings apart
 
# L_severity: MSE on CVSS severity score prediction (auxiliary head)
L_severity = MSELoss(pred_severity, cvss_labels)
 
# Hyperparameters (based on VISION paper guidance):
λ_1 = 1.0  # main classification loss
λ_2 = 0.5  # CFA contrastive loss
λ_3 = 0.1  # severity auxiliary loss

5.4 Training Configuration

5.5 Multi-Task Output Heads


6. Inference & Serving Plane

6.1 Inference Pipeline
┌─ Inference Pipeline ──────────────────────────────────────┐
│    Input: C source file or function                           │
│         │                                                     │
│         ▼                                                     │
│    ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐   │
│    │  Pre-processing Stage (~50ms)                        │   │
│    │  1. Function boundary detection (tree-sitter parser) │   │
│    │  2. Per-function CPG generation (Joern subprocess)   │   │
│    │  3. Inter-proc: callee source lookup + LLM summary   │   │
│    │     (cached: skip if callee seen before)             │   │
│    └──────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘   │
│         │                                                     │
│         ▼                                                     │
│    ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐   │
│    │  Embedding Stage (~100ms per function)               │   │
│    │  1. CodeBERT tokenize + encode → 768-d               │   │
│    │  2. CPG node embed initialization                    │   │
│    │  3. Taint path extraction                            │   │
│    └──────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘   │
│         │                                                     │
│         ▼                                                     │
│    ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐   │
│    │  Model Inference Stage (~30ms)                       │   │
│    │  1. CodeBERT forward pass                            │   │
│    │  2. GGNN propagation (3 layers)                      │   │
│    │  3. Cross-attention fusion                           │   │
│    │  4. Multi-head output                                │   │
│    └──────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘   │
│         │                                                     │
│         ▼                                                     │
│    ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐   │
│    │  Post-processing Stage (~20ms)                       │   │
│    │  1. Threshold application (default: 0.5)             │   │
│    │  2. CWE label decoding                               │   │
│    │  3. Illuminati node importance extraction            │   │
│    │  4. Counterfactual explanation generation            │   │
│    └──────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘   │
│         │                                                     │
│         ▼                                                     │
│    Prediction JSON (see Section 6.2)                          │
└──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

6.2 Prediction Schema
{
  'function_name':     'process_input',
  'file':              'src/network/handler.c:42',
  'is_vulnerable':     true,
  'confidence':        0.94,
  'cwe':               'CWE-89',
  'cwe_name':          'SQL Injection',
  'severity_score':    8.1,
  'severity_label':    'HIGH',
  'taint_path': [
    {'node': 'argv[1]',      'role': 'SOURCE', 'line': 44},
    {'node': 'query_buf',    'role': 'PROPAGATION', 'line': 48},
    {'node': 'mysql_query()',  'role': 'SINK', 'line': 51}
  ],
  'key_nodes': [                    // from Illuminati explainer
    {'node': 'sprintf(query, ...)', 'importance': 0.87, 'line': 48},
    {'node': 'argv[1]',            'importance': 0.72, 'line': 44}
  ],
  'counterfactual_hint': {           // CFExplainer output
    'description': 'Replace sprintf with parameterized query binding',
    'minimal_fix_lines': [48, 51],
    'fix_pattern': 'CWE-89-parameterized-query'
  },
  'model_version':  'streamguard-v1.2.0',
  'inference_ms':   198,
  'scan_id':        'sg-2026-abc123'
}

6.3 API Endpoints

6.4 Performance Requirements & SLAs


7. Dashboard, Feedback & Continuous Learning Plane

7.1 Dashboard Components

7.2 Human-in-the-Loop Feedback Flow
┌─ Feedback Loop ───────────────────────────────────────────┐
│    Prediction with confidence < 0.75 or flagged as FP/FN      │
│         │                                                     │
│         ▼                                                     │
│    ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐   │
│    │  Human Review Queue (Label Studio)                   │   │
│    │  Analyst sees:                                       │   │
│    │  - Original code (syntax highlighted)               │    │
│    │  - Model's prediction + confidence                  │    │
│    │  - CPG visualization (key nodes)                    │    │
│    │  - Counterfactual hint                               │   │
│    │  Analyst can:                                        │   │
│    │  - Confirm prediction (TP/TN)                       │    │
│    │  - Correct label (FP/FN)                            │    │
│    │  - Add CWE type annotation                          │    │
│    │  - Write corrected code (creates new CFA pair)      │    │
│    └──────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘   │
│         │                                                     │
│         ├─── Confirmed ──► Add to hard-negative/positive mine │
│         └─── Corrected ──► New labeled sample + CFA pair      │
│                                  │                            │
│                                  ▼                            │
│                      Re-training Trigger (weekly batch)       │
│                      OR immediate if correction_count > 100   │
└──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

7.3 Continuous Learning Pipeline


8. Infrastructure & Deployment Architecture

8.1 Service Architecture

8.2 CI/CD Integration
# .github/workflows/streamguard-scan.yml
name: StreamGuard Vulnerability Scan
on: [pull_request]
jobs:
  scan:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      - name: StreamGuard Scan
        run: |
          curl -X POST https://streamguard.internal/v1/scan/batch \
            -F 'files=@.' \
            -F 'threshold=0.7' \
            --max-time 300 > scan_results.json
      - name: Fail on HIGH severity
        run: |
          python .streamguard/check_results.py \
            --results scan_results.json \
            --fail-on severity>=HIGH \
            --fail-on cwe=CWE-89,CWE-78,CWE-79 \
            --annotate-pr true


9. Technical Requirements Matrix

9.1 Functional Requirements

9.2 Non-Functional Requirements

9.3 Model Performance Targets by CWE


10. Novel Contributions vs Existing Research


Summary: StreamGuard is positioned as the first system to combine (1) Vul-LMGNN joint CodeBERT/GGNN architecture, (2) VISION-style LLM counterfactual augmentation across 12 CWE types, (3) VulnSC inter-procedural callee context injection, and (4) a production feedback loop that continuously generates new CFA pairs. Each component has strong individual research backing; their combination is the novel contribution.


StreamGuard Full System Architecture  |  v1.0  |  March 2026  |  Research-grounded & Production-grade


--- END OF StreamGuard_Architecture.docx ---



--- START OF StreamGuard_Refined_Collection_Strategy_v2.docx ---




StreamGuard
Refined Data Collection Strategy
Per-Collector Deep Dive  •  Realistic Yields  •  Proven Fixes




1. Root Cause Analysis — Why the Last Run Collected Only 294 Samples

ℹ  Key Insight: This section diagnoses why collection failed. Every fix in later sections traces back to one of these root causes. Read this first before running any collector.

1.1 The Fundamental Misunderstanding About NVD/CVE
⚠ Why It Failed Before: The NVD API returns vulnerability METADATA — CVE IDs, CVSS scores, CWE tags, and reference URLs. It does NOT return source code. The cve_collector was probably saving these metadata records as 'samples', which is why only 294 objects were saved (the ones that happened to have a description mentioning code). This data is useless for training a code model.
✓ Fix: CVE data is only valuable as an INDEX. For each CVE, you must follow the reference URL to a GitHub/GitLab commit, extract the diff, parse the changed .c files, and store the before/after code as a pair. The collector must do this two-step process: (1) get CVE list from NVD, (2) for each CVE follow its GitHub reference and mine the actual code.

1.2 Silent Failures With No Retry
⚠ Why It Failed Before: API calls that returned 429 (rate limit), 503 (service unavailable), or network timeouts were likely caught by a bare except clause and silently skipped. The collector moved on, logged nothing meaningful, and the sample was permanently lost. This is the most common cause of low yield in long-running collection jobs.
✓ Fix: Every HTTP request must use the tenacity @retry decorator with exponential backoff. Every skipped sample must be written to a failed_items.jsonl file for later retry. The orchestrator must re-run the failed_items file after the main collection completes.

1.3 No C-Language Filter at Ingest Time
⚠ Why It Failed Before: GitHub Advisories and OSV cover all ecosystems (npm, PyPI, Go, Rust, etc.). Without an explicit C/C++ filter, the collector was likely downloading thousands of Python and JavaScript vulnerability records, filling disk, and hitting rate limits — all without collecting a single C sample.
✓ Fix: Filter at the API query level, not post-collection. For GitHub GraphQL: filter by ecosystem. For OSV: filter by package.ecosystem in ['Linux', 'OSS-Fuzz']. For repo mining: only process files ending in .c or .h.

1.4 No Checkpoint = Full Restart on Any Interruption
⚠ Why It Failed Before: A 10-hour collection job interrupted at hour 8 restarts from zero if there is no checkpoint. Given that API tokens expire, machines sleep, and networks drop, any realistic collection will be interrupted. Without checkpoints, effective yield approaches zero on long jobs.
✓ Fix: Checkpoint after every page (not every item). Store: last_cursor (string), total_saved (int), failed_ids (list), and timestamp. The first thing each collector does on startup is load the checkpoint. The last thing it does before sleeping/exiting is save it.

1.5 Diff Parsing Failures in Repo Miner
⚠ Why It Failed Before: Git diffs contain binary files, renames, mode changes, and empty files. If the diff parser assumed all hunks are code, it would crash or produce garbage. The miner likely had no fallback when git clone failed due to large repo size (Linux kernel is 4GB+).
✓ Fix: Use 'git log --diff-filter=M --no-merges' to skip renames/additions. Clone with --depth=50 (shallow clone) to avoid downloading full history. Use 'git show HASH -- filename.c' to fetch only the specific file at a commit instead of cloning the whole repo.

1.6 Summary of Root Causes

2. Revised Realistic Targets

The original plan set targets without accounting for the actual yield rate of each source. Below are evidence-based estimates derived from what each API actually returns and what fraction becomes usable C code pairs.


Realistic Total: 35,600 – 54,500 validated C samples across all sources. Working estimate: 42,000 samples by Week 7. This is achievable with proper implementation of each collector. The previous run's 294 samples was an implementation bug, not a data scarcity problem.

3. Collector 1 — NVD / CVE


3.1 The Correct Two-Phase Architecture
ℹ  Key Insight: Phase 1: Use NVD API to build a list of CVE IDs that (a) affect C software, (b) have a GitHub/GitLab reference URL, and (c) have a CWE tag. Phase 2: For each CVE ID, follow the GitHub reference URL to find the fixing commit and extract before/after .c code. Phase 1 takes hours. Phase 2 takes days. They must be separate steps with separate checkpoints.

3.1.1 Phase 1: CVE Index Collection (NVD API)
Query parameters that maximize C-language yield:
# Phase 1: Build CVE index — runs in ~3 hours
# Key filters to use in the NVD API:
 
NVD_URL = 'https://services.nvd.nist.gov/rest/json/cves/2.0'
 
# Run one query per CWE type to get manageable batches:
CWE_TARGETS = [
    'CWE-89',   # SQL Injection
    'CWE-78',   # OS Command Injection
    'CWE-79',   # XSS
    'CWE-119',  # Buffer Overflow
    'CWE-120',  # Buffer Copy without Check
    'CWE-121',  # Stack-based Buffer Overflow
    'CWE-122',  # Heap-based Buffer Overflow
    'CWE-125',  # Out-of-bounds Read
    'CWE-134',  # Format String
    'CWE-190',  # Integer Overflow
    'CWE-416',  # Use After Free
    'CWE-476',  # NULL Pointer Dereference
]
 
# For each CWE, paginate with startIndex until totalResults exhausted:
params = {
    'resultsPerPage': 2000,
    'startIndex': checkpoint['start_index'],
    'cvssV3Severity': 'HIGH,CRITICAL',  # Focus high-severity
}
# Add CWE filter as: params['cweId'] = 'CWE-89'
 
# CRITICAL: Only save CVEs that have a GitHub/GitLab reference URL
def has_code_reference(cve_item):
    refs = cve_item.get('references', [])
    for ref in refs:
        url = ref.get('url', '')
        if 'github.com' in url and '/commit/' in url:
            return True
        if 'gitlab.com' in url and '/commit/' in url:
            return True
    return False
 
# Save to: data/raw/cve/index/cve_index.jsonl
# Each record: { 'cve_id', 'cwe', 'cvss', 'github_commit_urls': [...] }

3.1.2 Phase 2: Code Extraction from GitHub Commits
This is the step the original collector was missing entirely. For each CVE in the index, extract actual C code:
# Phase 2: For each CVE in the index, extract code pairs
# Input: data/raw/cve/index/cve_index.jsonl
# Output: data/raw/cve/pairs/  (one .json per CVE pair)
 
import re, requests
 
GITHUB_API = 'https://api.github.com'
HEADERS = {'Authorization': f'token {GITHUB_TOKEN}', 'Accept': 'application/vnd.github.v3+json'}
 
def extract_code_from_commit(commit_url):
    # Parse: https://github.com/OWNER/REPO/commit/HASH
    m = re.match(r'https://github\.com/([^/]+)/([^/]+)/commit/([a-f0-9]+)', commit_url)
    if not m: return None
    owner, repo, sha = m.groups()
 
    # Get commit diff via API (no clone needed!)
    api_url = f'{GITHUB_API}/repos/{owner}/{repo}/commits/{sha}'
    resp = requests.get(api_url, headers=HEADERS, timeout=30)
    if resp.status_code != 200:
        return None  # write to failed_items.jsonl
 
    commit = resp.json()
    pairs = []
    for file in commit.get('files', []):
        fname = file.get('filename', '')
        if not (fname.endswith('.c') or fname.endswith('.h')):
            continue  # skip non-C files
        if file.get('status') not in ('modified',):
            continue  # skip added/removed/renamed
 
        patch = file.get('patch', '')
        if not patch or len(patch) > 8000:
            continue  # skip huge diffs
 
        # Extract before (lines starting with -) and after (lines with +)
        before_lines = [l[1:] for l in patch.split('\n') if l.startswith('-') and not l.startswith('---')]
        after_lines  = [l[1:] for l in patch.split('\n') if l.startswith('+') and not l.startswith('+++')]
 
        if len(before_lines) < 3 or len(before_lines) > 200:
            continue  # too small or too large
 
        pairs.append({
            'vulnerable_code': '\n'.join(before_lines),
            'safe_code':       '\n'.join(after_lines),
            'filename':        fname,
            'commit_sha':      sha,
        })
    return pairs

3.2 CVE Rate Limiting — Exact Implementation
⚠ Why It Failed Before: The most common NVD rate limit error is hitting 429 NOT from too many API calls, but from bursting — sending 10 requests in 1 second instead of spreading them. A simple time.sleep(0.65) after every request reliably stays within the 50/30s limit.
from tenacity import retry, wait_exponential, stop_after_attempt, retry_if_exception_type
import time, requests
 
@retry(
    wait=wait_exponential(multiplier=2, min=30, max=300),
    stop=stop_after_attempt(5),
    retry=retry_if_exception_type((requests.HTTPError, requests.Timeout, ConnectionError)),
    before_sleep=lambda rs: logger.warning(f'NVD retry {rs.attempt_number}/5, sleeping...')
)
def nvd_get(session, params, api_key):
    resp = session.get(NVD_URL,
        headers={'apiKey': api_key},
        params=params,
        timeout=45)
    if resp.status_code == 429:
        raise requests.HTTPError('Rate limited')  # triggers retry
    resp.raise_for_status()
    time.sleep(0.65)  # ALWAYS sleep after every call
    return resp.json()

3.3 CVE Checkpoint Format
# checkpoints/cve_phase1.json  (Phase 1: index building)
{
  'cwe_cursor': {
    'CWE-89':  { 'start_index': 4000, 'total': 6200, 'done': false },
    'CWE-78':  { 'start_index': 0,    'total': null,  'done': false },
    'CWE-119': { 'start_index': 8000, 'total': 8000,  'done': true  },
    ...  // one entry per CWE_TARGETS entry
  },
  'index_count': 14820,
  'updated_at': '2026-03-15T12:00:00Z'
}
 
# checkpoints/cve_phase2.json  (Phase 2: code extraction)
{
  'processed_ids': ['CVE-2023-1234', 'CVE-2023-5678', ...],  // set
  'failed_ids':    ['CVE-2023-9999'],  // retry these
  'pairs_saved':   3421,
  'updated_at':    '2026-03-16T08:00:00Z'
}

3.4 Expected CVE Output & Success Criteria

4. Collector 2 — GitHub Security Advisories


4.1 Correct GraphQL Query for C Advisories
⚠ Why It Failed Before: The GitHub Advisory database organizes by package ecosystem. C/C++ projects are NOT under a named ecosystem — they appear under 'OTHER' or with no ecosystem at all. Querying for ecosystem: NPM or PYTHON returns zero C results. This is likely why the previous collector got 0 samples.
# Correct GraphQL query for C/C++ advisories
ADVISORY_QUERY = '''
query($cursor: String) {
  securityAdvisories(
    first: 100
    after: $cursor
    orderBy: { field: PUBLISHED_AT, direction: DESC }
  ) {
    pageInfo { hasNextPage endCursor }
    nodes {
      ghsaId
      summary
      severity
      cvss { score }
      cwes(first: 5) { nodes { cweId name } }
      vulnerabilities(first: 10) {
        nodes {
          package { name ecosystem }
          vulnerableVersionRange
          firstPatchedVersion { identifier }
        }
      }
      references { url }
    }
  }
}
'''
 
# After fetching each advisory, filter for C relevance:
C_KEYWORDS = ['linux', 'kernel', 'glibc', 'openssl', 'curl', 'libpng',
              'ffmpeg', 'nginx', 'apache', 'sqlite', 'zlib', 'expat',
              'libxml', 'imagemagick', 'openjpeg', 'libjpeg', 'tcpdump']
 
def is_c_advisory(advisory):
    summary_lower = advisory['summary'].lower()
    for kw in C_KEYWORDS:
        if kw in summary_lower:
            return True
    # Also check if any reference URL points to a known C repo
    for ref in advisory.get('references', []):
        if any(kw in ref['url'].lower() for kw in C_KEYWORDS):
            return True
    return False

4.2 Finding the Fixing Commit from an Advisory
GitHub Advisories give you the patched version number but not the commit hash. You need to resolve version → tag → commit:
def find_fixing_commit(owner, repo, patched_version):
    """Resolve a patched version string to a commit SHA."""
    # Strategy 1: Find tag matching patched_version
    tags_url = f'https://api.github.com/repos/{owner}/{repo}/tags'
    resp = requests.get(tags_url, headers=HEADERS, timeout=30)
    for tag in resp.json():
        tag_name = tag['name'].lstrip('v')
        if tag_name == patched_version.lstrip('v'):
            return tag['commit']['sha']
 
    # Strategy 2: Search releases
    releases_url = f'https://api.github.com/repos/{owner}/{repo}/releases'
    resp = requests.get(releases_url, headers=HEADERS, timeout=30)
    for release in resp.json():
        if patched_version in release.get('tag_name', ''):
            # Get commits between previous tag and this one
            return get_security_commit_in_range(owner, repo, release['tag_name'])
 
    # Strategy 3: Search commit messages for the advisory GHSA ID
    search_url = f'https://api.github.com/search/commits'
    params = { 'q': f'repo:{owner}/{repo} {advisory_id}' }
    resp = requests.get(search_url, headers={**HEADERS, 'Accept':'application/vnd.github.cloak-preview'}, params=params)
    items = resp.json().get('items', [])
    if items:
        return items[0]['sha']
 
    return None  # could not resolve — write to unresolved.jsonl

4.3 GitHub Rate Limit Management — Critical
⚠ Why It Failed Before: GitHub's GraphQL API uses a POINT-based rate limit, not a request count. A query that fetches advisory + vulnerabilities + references in one call costs ~8-10 points. At 5,000 points/hour, that is only ~500 advisories/hour. Without monitoring, the collector hits the limit silently and gets 403 errors treated as empty results.
def get_github_rate_status():
    query = '{ rateLimit { limit cost remaining resetAt used } }'
    resp = requests.post(GITHUB_GRAPHQL_URL, json={'query': query}, headers=HEADERS)
    rl = resp.json()['data']['rateLimit']
    logger.info(f'GitHub: {rl["remaining"]}/{rl["limit"]} pts remaining. Resets: {rl["resetAt"]}')
    return rl
 
# Call this every 50 advisory pages:
if page_count % 50 == 0:
    rl = get_github_rate_status()
    if rl['remaining'] < 500:  # less than ~50 queries left
        reset_dt = datetime.fromisoformat(rl['resetAt'].replace('Z','+00:00'))
        sleep_sec = max(0, (reset_dt - datetime.now(tz=timezone.utc)).total_seconds()) + 30
        logger.warning(f'Rate limit low ({rl["remaining"]} pts). Sleeping {sleep_sec:.0f}s')
        save_checkpoint()  # always save before sleeping
        time.sleep(sleep_sec)

4.4 GitHub Advisory Checkpoint Format
# checkpoints/github_advisory.json
{
  'last_cursor': 'Y3Vyc29yOnYyOpK5...',  // GraphQL pagination cursor
  'advisories_fetched': 2840,
  'c_advisories_found': 412,
  'pairs_extracted': 1820,
  'unresolved_commits': ['GHSA-xxxx-yyyy-zzzz', ...],  // retry later
  'rate_limit_pauses': 3,
  'updated_at': '2026-03-18T14:30:00Z'
}

4.5 Expected GitHub Advisory Output

5. Collector 3 — OSV (Open Source Vulnerabilities)


5.1 Correct OSV Query Strategy
ℹ  Key Insight: OSV is best used as a SUPPLEMENT to GitHub Advisory, not a replacement. Its primary value is that many OSV records include the exact fixing commit SHA in the JSON — eliminating the version-to-commit resolution step that causes failures in the GitHub collector.
# OSV ecosystems that contain C code:
C_OSV_ECOSYSTEMS = [
    'Linux',     # Linux kernel CVEs — huge source
    'OSS-Fuzz',  # Google's fuzzing project — all C/C++ targets
    # Note: Do NOT use 'GitHub Actions', 'npm', 'PyPI' etc.
]
 
# Query ALL vulnerabilities in batches:
def fetch_osv_batch(page_token=None):
    payload = {
        'query': {'ecosystem': 'Linux'},
        'page_size': 1000,
    }
    if page_token:
        payload['page_token'] = page_token
    resp = requests.post('https://api.osv.dev/v1/querybatch', json=payload, timeout=60)
    return resp.json()
 
# For each OSV record, extract the fix commit directly:
def extract_osv_fix_commit(osv_record):
    for affected in osv_record.get('affected', []):
        for r in affected.get('ranges', []):
            if r.get('type') == 'GIT':
                for ev in r.get('events', []):
                    if 'fixed' in ev:
                        return {
                            'repo_url': r.get('repo'),
                            'fix_commit': ev['fixed']
                        }
    return None  # no direct commit — fall back to version resolution

5.2 OSV Deduplication Against GitHub Advisory
Because OSV and GitHub Advisory share data sources, many records overlap. Dedup at the CVE ID level before code extraction:
# Before running OSV Phase 2 code extraction:
# Load all CVE IDs already extracted by GitHub Advisory collector
already_processed = set()
for f in glob('data/raw/github_advisory/pairs/*.json'):
    d = json.load(open(f))
    if d.get('cve_id'):  already_processed.add(d['cve_id'])
 
# Skip OSV records whose CVE is already in the set:
for osv_record in osv_records:
    aliases = osv_record.get('aliases', [])
    cve = next((a for a in aliases if a.startswith('CVE-')), None)
    if cve and cve in already_processed:
        stats['skipped_duplicate'] += 1
        continue
    # Otherwise proceed with code extraction

6. Collector 4 — Exploit-DB


6.1 Correct ExploitDB Collection Method
⚠ Why It Failed Before: The previous collector was likely sending HTTP requests to exploit-db.com with scraping logic. This is fragile, rate-limited, and requires a CSRF token. The correct method is to clone the public GitLab mirror once and process everything locally.
# ONE-TIME: Clone ExploitDB GitLab mirror (~300MB)
git clone --depth=1 https://gitlab.com/exploit-database/exploitdb.git data/raw/exploitdb/repo
 
# The repo contains:
#   files_exploits.csv   — metadata for all exploits
#   exploits/            — exploit files organized by platform
#     linux/local/       — most relevant for C code
#     linux/remote/
#     multiple/local/
 
# Process locally — no API calls needed:
import pandas as pd
df = pd.read_csv('data/raw/exploitdb/repo/files_exploits.csv')
 
# Filter for C code on Linux/Unix platforms:
c_exploits = df[
    (df['platform'].str.lower().isin(['linux', 'unix', 'freebsd', 'solaris'])) &
    (df['type'].str.lower().isin(['local', 'remote', 'dos'])) &
    (df['language'].str.lower().str.contains('c', na=False))
]
print(f'Found {len(c_exploits)} candidate C exploits')
 
# For each exploit, read the file and classify:
for _, row in c_exploits.iterrows():
    exploit_path = f'data/raw/exploitdb/repo/{row["file"]}'
    if not os.path.exists(exploit_path): continue
    code_text = open(exploit_path, errors='replace').read()
    if len(code_text) < 100 or len(code_text) > 50000: continue
 
    # Classify by vulnerability pattern in the exploit code:
    cwe = classify_exploit_cwe(code_text)  # see function below
    save_sample({
        'id': f'exploitdb:{row["id"]}',
        'code': code_text,
        'label': 1,  # All exploits are vulnerable by definition
        'cwe': cwe,
        'source': 'exploitdb',
    })

6.2 CWE Classification for Exploit Code
# Heuristic CWE classifier based on exploit code patterns
import re
 
def classify_exploit_cwe(code):
    code_lower = code.lower()
    # SQL Injection indicators
    if any(p in code_lower for p in ['select ', 'insert ', 'union ', 'sql', "'\'  --"]):
        return 'CWE-89'
    # Command injection
    if any(p in code_lower for p in ['system(', 'popen(', 'execve(', '/bin/sh', 'cmd=']):
        return 'CWE-78'
    # Buffer overflow
    if any(p in code_lower for p in ['strcpy(', 'strcat(', 'sprintf(', 'gets(', 'memcpy(']):
        if 'overflow' in code_lower or 'shellcode' in code_lower:
            return 'CWE-120'
        return 'CWE-119'
    # Format string
    if re.search(r'printf\s*\([^"\n]*[^,]\)', code):
        return 'CWE-134'
    # Heap exploit indicators
    if any(p in code_lower for p in ['use-after-free', 'uaf', 'double free', 'heap spray']):
        return 'CWE-416'
    return 'CWE-UNKNOWN'  # flag for manual review

6.3 Generating Safe Counterparts for ExploitDB
Since ExploitDB only provides vulnerable code, the safe counterpart must be created by a simple mutation rule applied to each exploit. This is NOT synthetic generation — it is rule-based patching:

7. Collector 5 — Repository Miner (Highest Yield Source)

The repo miner is the single highest-yield source in this entire pipeline. Done correctly, it alone can produce 18,000–28,000 before/after C code pairs. The Linux kernel has 3,000+ CVE-labeled security fix commits. This collector deserves the most implementation effort.

7.1 Target Repository List with Expected Yields

7.2 The Correct Commit Mining Implementation
⚠ Why It Failed Before: The previous repo miner was almost certainly trying to git clone the repositories first. For the Linux kernel (4GB+) or FFmpeg (2GB+), this causes timeouts or OOM errors before a single sample is extracted. The correct approach uses the GitHub Commits API to stream commits and diffs without any local clone.
# CORRECT approach: GitHub API streaming — no git clone
 
SECURITY_KEYWORDS = [
    'CVE-', 'security', 'vulnerability', 'overflow', 'injection',
    'sanitize', 'sanitise', 'fix.*leak', 'null.*deref', 'use.after.free',
    'out.of.bounds', 'stack.*smash', 'heap.*corrupt', 'integer.*overflow',
    'format.*string', 'buffer.*over', 'memory.*corrupt', 'double.*free'
]
 
import re
SECURITY_RE = re.compile('|'.join(SECURITY_KEYWORDS), re.IGNORECASE)
 
def mine_repo_via_api(owner, repo, since_date='2015-01-01'):
    """Mine security commits from a repo WITHOUT cloning it."""
    page = 1
    while True:
        # Fetch commit list page
        url = f'https://api.github.com/repos/{owner}/{repo}/commits'
        params = {
            'since': f'{since_date}T00:00:00Z',
            'per_page': 100,
            'page': page
        }
        resp = requests.get(url, headers=HEADERS, params=params, timeout=30)
        check_rate_limit(resp)  # see rate limit section
        commits = resp.json()
        if not commits or isinstance(commits, dict):  # dict = error
            break
 
        for commit in commits:
            msg = commit.get('commit', {}).get('message', '')
            if not SECURITY_RE.search(msg):
                continue  # not a security commit — skip
 
            # Fetch diff for this specific commit
            sha = commit['sha']
            pairs = extract_code_from_commit_api(owner, repo, sha)
            if pairs:
                for pair in pairs:
                    pair['commit_message'] = msg[:500]
                    pair['cwe'] = infer_cwe_from_message(msg)
                    save_pair(pair)  # writes to data/raw/repos/
                    checkpoint['pairs_saved'] += 1
 
        page += 1
        save_checkpoint()  # save after every page of commits
        time.sleep(0.8)    # respect rate limit

7.3 Commit Message → CWE Inference
def infer_cwe_from_message(msg):
    msg_lower = msg.lower()
    if re.search(r'buffer.{0,15}overflow|stack.{0,10}overflow|bounds.{0,10}check', msg_lower):
        return 'CWE-119'
    if 'use.after.free' in msg_lower or 'uaf' in msg_lower or 'dangling' in msg_lower:
        return 'CWE-416'
    if 'null.{0,5}deref' in msg_lower or 'null pointer' in msg_lower:
        return 'CWE-476'
    if 'integer.{0,10}overflow' in msg_lower or 'integer.{0,5}wrap' in msg_lower:
        return 'CWE-190'
    if 'format.{0,10}string' in msg_lower:
        return 'CWE-134'
    if 'sql' in msg_lower or 'injection' in msg_lower:
        return 'CWE-89'
    if 'command.{0,10}inject' in msg_lower or 'shell.{0,5}inject' in msg_lower:
        return 'CWE-78'
    if re.search(r'cve-\d{4}-\d+', msg_lower):
        return 'CWE-NEEDS-LOOKUP'  # has CVE ID — look up CWE from NVD index
    return 'CWE-UNKNOWN'

7.4 Diff Quality Filters
Every diff must pass all of these before being saved as a training pair:

7.5 Repo Miner Checkpoint Format
# checkpoints/repos_state.json
{
  'repos': {
    'torvalds/linux': {
      'page': 147,
      'since_date': '2015-01-01',
      'pairs_saved': 2341,
      'last_sha': 'a3b8c9d...',
      'status': 'in_progress'  // 'complete' | 'error' | 'in_progress'
    },
    'openssl/openssl': { 'page': 0, 'pairs_saved': 0, 'status': 'pending' },
    ...  // one entry per repo in TARGET_REPOS
  },
  'total_pairs': 2341,
  'updated_at': '2026-03-20T09:15:00Z'
}
 
# Resume logic: skip repos with status='complete'
# Start repos with status='in_progress' from their saved page
# Start repos with status='pending' from page 1

8. SARD — NIST Software Assurance Reference Dataset (Highest Priority)

START HERE. SARD should be the very first thing processed. It is a government-funded public domain dataset with 170,000+ pre-labeled C test cases. It requires no API calls, no rate limiting, and no code extraction — just a bulk download and filter script. Running it first gives you 8,000–12,000 high-quality samples within 1–2 days while the API collectors run in parallel.


8.1 SARD Collection Commands
# Step 1: Download SARD archives for relevant CWEs
# Base URL: https://samate.nist.gov/SARD/downloads/
 
mkdir -p data/raw/sard
cd data/raw/sard
 
# Download CWE-specific test case archives:
for CWE in 89 78 79 119 120 121 122 125 134 190 416 476; do
    echo "Downloading CWE-${CWE}..."
    wget -q "https://samate.nist.gov/SARD/test-cases/downloads/C/CWE-${CWE}.zip" \
         -O "CWE-${CWE}.zip" || echo "CWE-${CWE} not found, skipping"
    if [ -f "CWE-${CWE}.zip" ]; then
        unzip -q "CWE-${CWE}.zip" -d "CWE-${CWE}/"
    fi
done
 
# Step 2: Process into training format
python scripts/collection/process_sard.py \
    --sard-dir data/raw/sard \
    --output data/raw/sard_processed/ \
    --min-lines 5 \
    --max-lines 500

8.2 SARD Processing Logic
# process_sard.py core logic
import os, glob, json
 
def process_sard_directory(sard_dir, output_dir):
    pairs = {}  # pair_id -> { 'bad': code, 'good': code }
 
    for cwe_dir in glob.glob(f'{sard_dir}/CWE-*/'):  
        cwe = os.path.basename(cwe_dir.rstrip('/'))
        for c_file in glob.glob(f'{cwe_dir}/**/*.c', recursive=True):
            fname = os.path.basename(c_file)
            code = open(c_file, errors='replace').read()
            lines = [l for l in code.splitlines() if l.strip()]
 
            if len(lines) < 5 or len(lines) > 500:
                continue
 
            # SARD naming convention: funcname_bad.c or funcname_good.c
            # Some use: CWE119_func_bad01.c
            is_bad  = '_bad'  in fname.lower() or fname.lower().endswith('bad.c')
            is_good = '_good' in fname.lower() or fname.lower().endswith('good.c')
 
            if not (is_bad or is_good): continue
 
            # Build pair_id from base name
            pair_id = re.sub(r'_(bad|good)\d*\.c$', '', fname, flags=re.IGNORECASE)
            pair_id = f'{cwe}_{pair_id}'
 
            if pair_id not in pairs: pairs[pair_id] = {}
            if is_bad:  pairs[pair_id]['bad'] = code
            if is_good: pairs[pair_id]['good'] = code
 
    # Save as pairs where both sides exist, or singles otherwise
    for pair_id, data in pairs.items():
        cwe = pair_id.split('_')[0]
        if 'bad' in data and 'good' in data:
            save_pair(pair_id, data['bad'], data['good'], cwe, 'sard')
        elif 'bad' in data:
            save_single(pair_id, data['bad'], 1, cwe, 'sard')
        elif 'good' in data:
            save_single(pair_id, data['good'], 0, cwe, 'sard')

9. Orchestration — Running All Collectors

9.1 Execution Order (Critical)
ℹ  Key Insight: The order of execution matters for efficiency and disk space. SARD and ExploitDB are local and fast — run them first. CVE and GitHub Advisory are API-rate-limited — run them in parallel. Repo miner is the longest — start it last as it can run unattended.


9.2 Running All Collectors
# Terminal 1 — SARD + ExploitDB (start immediately):
python scripts/collection/process_sard.py --sard-dir data/raw/sard --output data/validated/sard/
git clone --depth=1 https://gitlab.com/exploit-database/exploitdb.git data/raw/exploitdb/repo
python scripts/collection/exploitdb_collector.py --repo-dir data/raw/exploitdb/repo
 
# Terminal 2 — CVE (Phase 1 then Phase 2):
python scripts/collection/cve_collector_enhanced.py --phase 1 --output data/raw/cve/index/
# After Phase 1 completes (~4 hours):
python scripts/collection/cve_collector_enhanced.py --phase 2 --input data/raw/cve/index/ --output data/raw/cve/pairs/
 
# Terminal 3 — GitHub Advisory:
python scripts/collection/github_advisory_collector_enhanced.py \
    --output data/raw/github_advisory/ \
    --checkpoint checkpoints/github_advisory.json
 
# Terminal 4 — OSV (run after GitHub starts so dedup works):
python scripts/collection/osv_collector.py \
    --output data/raw/osv/ \
    --dedup-against data/raw/github_advisory/
 
# Terminal 5 — Repo Miner (longest, start last):
python scripts/collection/repo_miner_enhanced.py \
    --repos torvalds/linux,openssl/openssl,curl/curl,git/git,nginx/nginx,ffmpeg/ffmpeg,php/php-src,sqlite/sqlite,libpng/libpng,madler/zlib \
    --output data/raw/repos/ \
    --checkpoint checkpoints/repos_state.json

9.3 Daily Health Check
# Run once per day to monitor all collectors:
python scripts/collection/health_check.py
 
# What it checks:
# 1. Count samples in each raw/ subdirectory
# 2. Read all checkpoints and report progress
# 3. Check disk space (alert if < 10GB free)
# 4. Tail last 20 lines of each collector log for errors
# 5. Count lines in each failed_items.jsonl
# 6. Estimate ETA based on current collection rate
 
# Sample output:
═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════
 StreamGuard Collection Health — 2026-03-22 09:00
═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════
 SARD          : 10,234 samples    [COMPLETE]
 ExploitDB     :    891 samples    [COMPLETE]
 CVE Phase 1   : 19,841 CVEs       [COMPLETE]
 CVE Phase 2   :  2,341 pairs      [IN PROGRESS — ETA 3.2 days]
 GitHub Adv    :  1,820 pairs      [IN PROGRESS — ETA 4.1 days]
 OSV           :    640 pairs      [IN PROGRESS — ETA 2.8 days]
 Repo Miner    :  8,201 pairs      [IN PROGRESS — ETA 6.5 days]
 Manual        :    240 samples    [IN PROGRESS — ongoing]
───────────────────────────────────────────────────────
 Total validated: 24,367 / ~42,000 target (58%)
 Disk used:  8.4 GB | Free: 41.6 GB
 Errors last 24h: CVE Phase 2: 12 failures (< 1% — OK)
═══════════════════════════════════════════════════════

10. Validation, Deduplication & Merge

10.1 Multi-Source Deduplication Strategy
Because CVE, GitHub Advisory, OSV, and Repo Miner all mine from GitHub commits, there will be significant overlap. Deduplication must happen at multiple levels:

10.2 Final Merge Command
# Run after all collectors are complete (or mostly complete)
python scripts/collection/merge_and_preprocess.py \
    --sources sard,exploitdb,cve,github_advisory,osv,repos,manual \
    --input-base data/raw/ \
    --output data/processed/merged/ \
    --dedup-levels hash,cve_id,commit_sha,minhash \
    --split-ratio 0.80,0.10,0.10 \
    --balance-max-ratio 1.5 \
    --log logs/merge.log
 
# balance-max-ratio 1.5 means:
# No single CWE type can be > 1.5x the average CWE count
# Prevents CWE-119 (most common) from dominating the dataset
 
# Expected output:
# data/processed/merged/train.json   (~33,600 samples / 80%)
# data/processed/merged/val.json     (~4,200 samples / 10%)
# data/processed/merged/test.json    (~4,200 samples / 10%)
# data/processed/merged/stats.json   (full distribution report)
# data/processed/merged/dedup_log.json (what was removed and why)

10.3 Target Label Distribution

11. Manual Dataset Generation Plan

ℹ  Key Insight: Manual data collection fills two critical gaps: (1) CWE types that automated sources under-represent (CWE-89, CWE-78, CWE-79 in C web code), and (2) quality-verified examples where automated labeling may be noisy. Target: 2,000 expert-labeled samples.

11.1 Manual Sources — Prioritized

11.2 Label Studio Workflow
# Install and start Label Studio
pip install label-studio
label-studio start --port 8080
 
# Import samples needing manual labels:
python scripts/export_for_labeling.py \
    --input data/raw/  \
    --filter 'cwe=CWE-UNKNOWN OR label=null' \
    --output data/labeling_queue/batch_$(date +%Y%m%d).json \
    --batch-size 200
 
# After labeling session:
python scripts/import_labels.py \
    --label-studio-export data/labeling_queue/labeled/ \
    --output data/raw/manual/

11.3 Vulnerable/Safe Pair Examples for Manual Writers
Buffer Overflow — CWE-120
Vulnerable:
void copy_username(char *input) {
    char username[64];
    strcpy(username, input);    /* no length check */
    log_access(username);
}
Safe:
void copy_username(const char *input) {
    char username[64];
    strncpy(username, input, sizeof(username) - 1);
    username[sizeof(username) - 1] = '\0';
    log_access(username);
}

SQL Injection — CWE-89
Vulnerable:
int login(sqlite3 *db, char *user, char *pass) {
    char sql[256];
    sprintf(sql, "SELECT id FROM users WHERE user='%s' AND pass='%s'", user, pass);
    /* attacker can inject: user = ' OR 1=1 -- */
    return sqlite3_exec(db, sql, NULL, NULL, NULL);
}
Safe:
int login(sqlite3 *db, const char *user, const char *pass) {
    sqlite3_stmt *stmt;
    const char *sql = "SELECT id FROM users WHERE user=? AND pass=?";
    sqlite3_prepare_v2(db, sql, -1, &stmt, NULL);
    sqlite3_bind_text(stmt, 1, user, -1, SQLITE_STATIC);
    sqlite3_bind_text(stmt, 2, pass, -1, SQLITE_STATIC);
    int rc = sqlite3_step(stmt);
    sqlite3_finalize(stmt);
    return rc;
}

Command Injection — CWE-78
Vulnerable:
void run_scan(char *hostname) {
    char cmd[256];
    sprintf(cmd, "ping -c 1 %s", hostname);
    system(cmd);  /* attacker input: '127.0.0.1; rm -rf /' */
}
Safe:
void run_scan(const char *hostname) {
    /* Validate: only allow alphanumeric, dots, hyphens */
    for (int i = 0; hostname[i]; i++) {
        if (!isalnum(hostname[i]) && hostname[i] != '.' && hostname[i] != '-') {
            log_error("Invalid hostname");
            return;
        }
    }
    char *argv[] = { "ping", "-c", "1", (char*)hostname, NULL };
    execvp(argv[0], argv);  /* no shell expansion */
}

12. Realistic Timeline


DO NOT start training early. The last run failed partly because of low data volume. Training on 5,000 samples will produce a model that looks like it learns but generalizes poorly. Wait for the full dataset. The 6-week collection is not a bottleneck — it is the project.

13. Pre-Training Data Quality Checklist

Run the audit script before starting ANY model training. All checks must pass:

python scripts/collection/pre_training_audit.py --dataset data/processed/merged/
 
REQUIRED CHECKS (all must PASS):
 
[ ] Total samples in train.json >= 30,000
[ ] Vulnerable / Safe ratio between 45:55 and 55:45
[ ] At least 7 distinct CWE types with >= 500 samples each
[ ] No CWE type > 35% of vulnerable samples (prevents bias)
[ ] Zero null or empty 'code' fields
[ ] Zero test-set samples with commit SHA appearing in train set
[ ] Code field average token length between 50 and 800 tokens
[ ] Dedup log confirms < 5% of samples were dropped as duplicates
[ ] Manual samples: at least 800 with reviewer_verified=true
[ ] All pair_ids link exactly 2 records (1 vuln + 1 safe)
[ ] stats.json exists with full CWE distribution table
 
WARNINGS (investigate but not blocking):
[ ] CWE-UNKNOWN samples < 10% of total
[ ] Average code length by source within 2x of global average
[ ] Failed items across all collectors < 10% of expected yield



StreamGuard — Refined Data Collection Strategy  |  v2.0  |  March 2026


--- END OF StreamGuard_Refined_Collection_Strategy_v2.docx ---

